<!--start metadata-->
Title: Reply to letter in "The Age" regarding Portland wool sales
Description: press statement
Date: 1/04/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 •

      YiZ:,.>a STA TE 1*°fC, NT :

      cJr LCvT~i ?RASER.:
                                                            .pr L l la t, 1963


                  The following is in reply to i•r. S. Harrison's letter which
      appeared in the "Age" on Friday, March 29th, Mr. Harrison is a woolbuyer 
      or retired buyer.


      The Editor, 
      The "Age",
      Collins Street,
      MELBOURNE


      Dear Sir,

              Your correspondent of last Friday, Mr. W. Si* Harrison, appears to 
      be guilty of the very thing which he sets out to correct. He implies that 
      a. partisan view of the Portland Wool Sales question has been given to the 
      public but doesn't he himself do this? It has been an age long tadtid for
•     those opposing Portland wool sales to say "sometime but not now". It was 
      precisely because of this opposition to Portland that the State Government 
      held its economic enquiry under the auspices of Professor Cochrane. The 
      Woolbuyerst Association had full and ample opportunity to give evidence to 
      the enquiry. Despite their evidence, Professor Cochrane found in his 
      conclusions -

              1. That Victoria, as a State, needed a third wool selling 
                  centre because of the increased volume of wool coming 
                  forward.

              2. That Portland, as the centre of a large and increasingly 
                  productive woolgrowing area with its modern harbour, was 
                  the logical place for the third selling centre.

              3. That wool sales should take place in the 1963-64 season.

              The Professor specifically said that he had judged the question 
      strictly on the economic merits of the particular case and that he had not 
      taken any general considerations of decentralization into account. This, 
      of course, makes Portland's claim much stronger.

              The 10/- a bale freight subsidy to which Mr. Harrison referred 
      was to apply to od.d lots for which shipping may not be available at Portland 
      within the normal period. After an exhaustive survey of the shipping problem 
      during the enquiry, it was concluded that, for the great majority of wool, 
      there would be no shipping problems from Portland. However, it was always 
      conceded by Portland interests that small lots to out of the way countries 
      may find difficulty. Indeed, this isn't surprising as I understand that 
      on occasion, wool has had to be freighted overland from Melbourne to Sydney 
      to catch an appropriate ship.

              last Friday, in a carefully worded resolution, I understand the 
      Victorian and South Australian Woolbuyers' Association re-affirmed its ban 
      on Portland sales. By this action the buyers are challenging the authority 
      and influence of the three powerful woolgrowing organizations who strongly 
      support the Portland venture,

              Indirectly, the buyers are also challenging the authority of the 
      new Australian Wool Board recently establised by Federal legislation to 
      manage the over-all affairs of the industry. This Board is controlled by 
      organizations that support Portland.



                                                                       /2.

                   -2




         In addition to this direct challenge to the productive section 
   of the industry, the buyers have also challenged. the State Government. The 
   Premier has made his wishes clear. Do the buyers really believe they can 
   win this fight against the avowed wishes and intentions of woolgrowers and 
   of the elected Government of the day?


                    Yours sincerely,

                    (S'gd) Malcolm Fraser
                                    It



•



















•

