<!--start metadata-->
Title: National Crimes Commission
Description: Electorate talks
Date: 24/10/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                     -l~ AUSTRALIA~,
                      ~)»)»4«





             PRIME MINISTEP






FOR MEDIA                        SUNDAY, 24 OCTOBER 1982




                    ELECTORATE TALK



The legislation for a National Crimes Commission which was 
introduced into Parliament last week will establish; an
effective agency designed specifically to combat organised crime 
and corruption in Australia. At the same time, the legislation 
provides a basis for effective co-operation with the states, 
and with police forces and other law enforcement agencies..


It has become clear in recent years that organised crime, and 
criminal activities relating to drugs and other matters, have 
got beyond the reach of our traditional law enforcement methods
and agencies. The Williams and Stewart. Royal Commissions on 
Drugs and Drug Trafficking, a number of joint Commonwealth-state 
police task force reports, and most recently the Costigan 
Royal Commission's Interim Report, all tell vastly disturbing 
stories about the spread and significance of organised crime 
in Australia. Mr Costigan's investigations into the Painters 
and Dockers Union have highlighted that Australia is not immune 
from the kind of criminal activities which most of us would have 
associated perhaps with Chicago or other countries, but not 
Australia.


Some quotations from the Costigan Report starkly illustrate 
the seriousness of the situation. Mr Costigan says, "I am 
satisfied that the Union, at least in Victoria, Newcastle, 
Queensland and South Australia if not. in Sydney as well, is 
an organised criminal group following criminal pursuits. At 
least in Victoria those in charge of the Union recruit
exclusively those who have serious criminal convictions." 
(Para.10.02 of Mr Costigan's edited Chapter 10 of Vol. 
4th Interim Report.) Mr Costigan also says in relation to the kind 
of activity he has unearthed, "The type of criminal activity 
is of a substantial kind. It involves large scale and continuing 
fraud, or large and continuous importation of drugs at great 
cost, continuing illegal gambling schemes or other forms of 
widespread criminal activity." (Para 10.09)


It is imperative to attack these problems urgently and
effectively, to prevent any further entrenchment of this kind 
of crime in Australia, and do everything possible to eradicate it. 
That is why the.Government is pressing ahead with legislation at 
this time. It is not good enough to go on as we have been
doing in spite of everything we know and in spite of all the talk

                                  2


about the need to act. The Crimes Commission will co-operate 
with traditional law enforcement agencies. It will in no 
sense replace them and its activities will be essentially 
directed towards types of crime which those agencies have 
experienced special difficulties in investigating.

I very much hope the states will keep an open mind and adopt
a co-operative stand in relation to the Commission because
the problems clearly straddle state boundaries, they affect
both Commonwealth and state legal jurisdictions. The Crimes
Commission will be operating in the areas of Commonwealth law,it
in no way infringes on state sovereignty or state rights.
But at the same time, if any or all of the states want to make
use of the Commission, then the Commission will be
empowered by our legislation to accept particular commissions
from the states, and to accept jurisdiction for areas of state
law which states may wish to confer on the Commission. This is
entirely up to the states to determine, but the way is open,.
and there is every reason why the Commonwealth/state co-operation
which has existed with Royal Commissions, joint task forces,
and the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence, should run
into the new Crimes Commission.

The Crimes Commission will be far more appropriate than Royal
Commissions to deal with organised crime.        Mr Costigan 
has emphasised the importance of a prosecuting arm to attend 
to prosecutions immediately they arise during investigations 
such as his. The Crimes Commission, while able to give. 
information to the police, will also have its own responsibility 
to develop cases for prosecution. In serious and complex. 
cases especially, it is intended that the Commission will work 
hand in hand with the legal counsel who will prosecute if a 
case for prosecution is found.

To make sure the Commission can deal with whatever forms of 
organised crime it uncovers, the Commission will have a broad. 
charter, giving it scope to look into complaints or follow up its 
own investigations, and it will have the powers needed to come 
to grips with organised crime. The legislation has been framed 
in away that will make the Commission effective, while also 
meeting the legitimate concerns which have been expressed 
about the idea of a National Crimes Commission.

I am confident that the Crimes Commission will make a major. 
contribution in dealing with organised crime. It is a vital 
Government initiative and I am confident it will receive the 
widespread support it deserves.



                              ---o0o---

