<!--start metadata-->
Title: Italy - Australia
Description: radio talks
Date: 29/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


+
   PRESS STATEMENT
   MALCOLM FRASER           29 September 1967


                ITALY — AUSTRALIA
              Statement by Malcolm Fraser, 
              Federal Member for Wannon


       In Canberra this week we have had the pleasure of welcoming to 
   Australia the President of the Republic of Italy, the first European Head of 
   State to visit this country. It is most fitting that this precedent should 
   have been established by the leader of a country with which Australia has such 
   close ties, In many ways, Italians have made a significant contribution to 
   Australian society. When we take into account the numbers of Italians who 
   have settled in this country, particularly in the last twenty years, it can 
   be seen just why this is so. Today, 1 in 7 of all Australians not born here 
   are Italian and 1 in every 40 of all Australians is Italian born. Now, only 
   Great Britain herself provides more new settlers than Italy,
       Too many Australians today tend to take the attitude that by letting 
   them come out here we are doing a favour for our immigrants. Whilst it is 
   true that Australia provides opportunities for Europeans to attain a standard 
   of living which would perhaps be out of their reach in the country of their 
   birth, it is also true that we need these people — we need the numbers, the 
   skills and the diversity of background and culture that they bring to us. 
   Australia is short of two things — people and capital. It is becoming 
   increasingly hard to attract migrants from Europe. Continental living standards 
   are rising and I think the days are long past when newcomers to Australia were 
   under the impression that our footpaths were paved with gold. It is therefore 
   good to know that a new Migration and Settlement Agreement was signed this 
   week by Italy and Australia. Under the terms of this we hope for a continued 
   inflow of Italian migrants and I think it is a well—known and accepted fact 
   that they are the type of new settler who are an asset to our country, for they 
   are prepared to work hard to make a good life for themselves here and their 
   contribution to our economy and the future of Australia is all the greater.
       If we look at some recent statistics on the distribution of the work 
   force in Australia, we will see how very dependant Australia is upon the 
   continuation of a viable and attractive immigration policy. In the period 
   1947-61 the male work force employed in nanufacturing industry in Australia 
   rose by 270,000 and 82% of these were people who arrived in Australia since 
   1947. The industries most basic to our economy employ a continually increasing 
   number of migrants. Today, 28% of total employment in the car and ship- 
   building industries is covered by migrant labour, In the extraction and 
   refining of petroleum and coal products the figure is 36% and in the extraction, 
   refining and founding of metals 33% of the work force are migrants. There are 
   no overall figures available for the iron and steel industry, but the employ- 
  ment of migrants here is relatively high — in some cases as high as 50%. In 
  the Wollongong—Port Kembla area where there has been so much manufacturing

                 2.

development, 2E% of the population is overseas—born.
     In 1961 migration provided 29% of our total population growth. 
Since that time our birth rate has fallen and last year, migrant inflow 
accounted for a record 45% of the total population growth.
     Because it recognises the necessity to encourage migrants to come 
to Australia and to keep them here the Government is continually seeking new 
sources of migrants. The Minister for Immigration has recently travelled 
widely in Europe for this purpose and despite the falling off in numbers of 
migrants coming from the familiar and established sources, the Government is 
hope ful that it will be possible to maintain a satisfactory balance for the 
future.

