<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Parliamentary Association visit to Western District
Description: press statement
Date: 19/10/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS •TATMENT                                 October 19th,1959






    InCOLM FRASER said today that he would be accompanying a party of 




delegates from the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association when they 




visit the Western District to have a look at Australian sheep shearing 




methods. It is not yet known how many delegates will be visiting the 




Western District, but so far members from South Africa and the West



Indies have said they would be present.  It is expected that many more 




will join the party, but it will not be known until all delegates have 




arrived in Melbourne.



      The party will be leaving Melbourne early on Wednesday morning 




and will be visiting "Eilyer", the Station property belonging to Mr. 




and Mrs. Ron. Austin, where shearing is in progress at the present 




time. Lunch will be served at the Station, and in the afternoon the 



 party will visit "Talindert", the property of Sir Chester and Lady 




Manifold, for afternoon tea.



       Mr. Hector Mclvor, the Federal Member for Gellibrand, and the 




State Members, Messrs. Fennessy, Ring, Wilcox and Gillett will also 




accompany the party.



        The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is composed of




Parliamentary representatives from every Commonwealth country. For 
   •



the last three or four weeks delegates from overseas countries have 




been visiting the various States of the Commonwealth, and the final 



ten days of their visit to Australia will be spent in Canberra where 




the Annual meeting of the Association will take place. This annual 




meeting is held in different Commonwealth countries each year. This 




year it is Australia's privilege to act as the host nation.



        The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association provides an extremely 




valuable forum which makes it possible for the rank and file members 




of the Commonwealth Parliaments to meet and to discuss each others 




problems. This is particularly important at the present time since the 




Commonwealth now has more coloured members than white, and it is vital 



that a free and friendly exchange of ideas be held between coloured 




and white members of the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth can provide 




to the world a forum in which we can prove that we believe that all 




people are equal, irrespective of race, colour or creed.









        'PHONED TO COUNTRY NEWSPAPERS — October 19th,1959

