<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1963 election
Description: press statement
Date: 11/12/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   PRESS STATEINT:
   2fiALCOLM FRASER:
                           December llth,1963
          At the Declaration of the Poll Malcolm Fraser said that the
   result of the election had brought a majority for the Government which was
   greater than most Government supporters had dared hope for. He said that
   the extent of the majority placed a very great responsibility on the Prime
   Minister, on the Government and on its supporters. He said it would be
   the task of each Government supporter in the new Parliament to fulfil this
   responsibility to the utmost and to justify the confidence that the
   Australian people had shown in the Prime Minister and the Government.
          He said it was a great personal victory for the Prime
   Minister whose policies and judgment had been completely vindicated. He
   also said that the majority in Wannon was greater than it had been in
   previous elections'and that it would be his task in the new Parliament to
   justify the increased confidence that had been shown in him as Member for
   Wannon.
          Malcolm Fraser emphasised that although we become divided
   into different Parties on polling day, once a member is chosen to represent
   an electorate he represents each person in the electorate no matter what
   their political views may be. He said he was confident that many people
   who may not have been his political supporters in the past had felt able
~  to approach him on matters on which they wanted assistance of one kind or
   another. He said that he wanted this to continue. He wanted every person
   to feel free to approach him on any matter if they wished to do so because
   as member for Wannon he represented each person in the electorate..
          In concluding Malcolm Fraser thanked Mr. King for the way he
   had conducted the election and wished him many happy and successful years
   as Returning Officer for this district..
          He thanked all those people who had supported him either by
   voting for him at the election or by actively working to support the Government
   cause. He said that he felt a large part of the victory was due to the very
   real enthusiasm that had been shown by many supporters all over the country.
   He said that he appreciated this help and this increased support and it would
   be his objective to justify it in the new Parliament.

