<!--start metadata-->
Title: Second of three articles on the economy
Description: press statement
Date: 9/04/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           •
         PRESS STATEMENT,                                            iFFK BNDING 9TH APRIL. 1 61.



                            SECOND Oÿ THREE ARTICLES ON TEE ECONOMY.

                     In last week's article I wrote of the measures that the 
         Government introduced early last year to try and control inflation. 
         I said these measures vrc uld have been successful but for two other 
         things that appeared after the Government's Budget was introduced in 
         August.

                     The first of these was the fall in wool prices which is 
         costing Australia nearly £70M, in overseas credits this year, Having 
         regard to the demand position for wool overseas, the Government was 
         justified in estimating that wool prices this year would average 
         what they did last year, This expectation on behalf of the Government, 
         as every woolgrower knows to his cost, has not been fulfilled.

                     The second matter which appeared after the Budget was 
         introduced was the large increase of £150M, in bank advances between 
ribs.411kFebruary and October.
                     You may remember that last week I said that one of the 
         measures the Government announced was a policy of credit restraint 
         with only a moderate increase in bank advances. The £150M, increase 
         was certainly far in excess of moderate. In saying this, I do not 
         intend to blame the Trading Banks. As most primary producers will 
         know, under the Australian banking system, producers have an overdraft 
         limit beyond which they must not draw, The system got out of control 
         because the Banks' estimates of the extent to which people pro uld 
         draw on their limits were much, much too conservative.

                     It was unfortunate that this great increase in bank advances .
         not only contributed to inflation but also, in a large measure,
         went to finance an additional flow of imports which, having regard
         to the fall in wool prices, the country could not afford, These
         two factors made further measures necessary,

                     The November measures included an increased sales tax on 
         cars which has since been repealed, Severe credit restrictions 
         were imposed, especially concerning the speculative sections of the 
         community, which included certain excess hire purchase activities 
         and the opei ation of some land trusts, of which we have heard a 
         great deal.

                     The existing level of credit to primary producers and to 
         the exporting industries was designed to remain intact, Two other 
         measures which have had some effect and which will be of a i2ermanent 
         nature because it is thought they are desirable were also intro- 
         duced. They involved a change in the tax law regarding the interest 
         payable on notes and debentures and certain incentives to encourage 
         life and superannuation funds to invest in Government Bonds,

                     It is not always realised that the tax incentives that 
         the Commonwealth Government gives to encourage people to insure 
         their lives in some way or another c osts the Commonwealth revenue 
         £35M, a year. Having regard to this and having regard to the great 
         pressure on Government funds for capital works at all times, the 
         Government felt it was fully justified in trying to encourage life 
         and superannuation funds to invest a proportion of their moneys in 
         Government securities,

                     The November measures are desigmd to further curb inflation 
         inside the economy and to create a balance between our demand for 
         imports and our capacity to pay for imports.

               -2-


    It has been suggested that the re-imposition of import 
licensing alone would cure the present situation. This is a simple 
view and one that clearly, by itself, would not work, 55% of imports, 
which is largely the section covered by capital equipment and raw 
materials, were running entirely free before licensing was lifted. 
The Government did not expect - and there was no reason for the 
Government to expect - imports in this section to rise very greatly 
following the lifting of licensing, over the rest of the field. 
However, the increase in this section was far greater than in those 
sections which were restricted before February 12 months ago, the 
increase being of the order of 33-35%. This was indicative of boom 
conditions inside Australia and of a basic unbalance between demand 
and our capacity to pay. It was a position which could not be allowed 
to go unchecked and thus the Government acted as it did.

    Some people have said that the Government's policies were 
not going to work because imports have not yet started to fall. I 
did not agree with this. I believe imports will show a fall in March 
and a much heavier fall in April and May, The reason imports have 
not shown a fall before this lies in the fact that many importers 
have been hedging against what they believe to be a possible re- 
introduction of import licensing. Therefore, they have been building 
up stocks as rapidly as possible.

    However, there is a limit to the extent which importers can 
do this and I think that limit is just about reached. Once the 
import position has righted itself and there is a balance in the 
economy, the Government's prime task will be to watch the employment 
field. The Government is already studying the position as regards 
housing in certain States and, indeed, special measures have already 
been introduced in Queensland to rectify unfavourable trends there.

    Over the last 10 years, unemployment in Australia has never 
reached 2% of the work force and, generally, has been much less than 
this. This is a better record than the United Kingdom, Canada or the 
U.S.A. It is a record that the Government will maintain. It is 
worth noting that Canada, with a population not that much greater 
than our own, at the present moment has 750,000 unemployed. Australia 
has less than one-tenth of this,

    The Government will be watching the economy most closely to 
see that corrective measures it has introduced do not go too far.

    In my next article I will deal with particular aspects of 
the present situation. I will deal with world-wide trends which 
represent the basic cause of Australia's difficulties at the present 
time and I will also deal with the level of credit available to 
primary producers.

