<!--start metadata-->
Title: Primary industries
Description: press statement
Date: 14/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STA`l'LPnENT:

îvALCOLM FRASER:

                                                    November 14th,19 S3


                 Malcolm Fraser said at Casterton

                 In the decade before 1948/49 Australia's great primary
industries did not expand to any extent. Indeed, the number of acres 
sown to wheat fell by one million.

                 In the period since 1948/49 there has been a tremendous 
expansion in the major rural industries. For example, wool production 
has increased from 1057 million pounds to 1600 million pounds in the last 
three years. Wheat acreage has increased by 4 million acres. The 
average yield has increased from 15 to 19 bushels per acre. Production 
in wheat has increased from 190 million bushels to 307 million bushels. 
Meat production has greatly expanded from a total of under 1 million 
tons to over 1 million 6 hundred thousand tons. This has been made 
possible because of the quality and energy of the Australian farmer, but 
the policies adopted by the Government have played an essential part in 
helping to achieve this expansion. Early in its term of office the 
Government abolished Federal land tax, it adopted taxation policies
designed to encourage re-investment in the land. It has greatly 
expanded funds available for research and extension and has recently 
introduced a new investment allowance to further encourage investment
in equipment for farming and agricultural purposes. A super subsidy 
has been introduced which will be of particular benefit to the high 
cost high rainfall areas, This should not only reduce farmers costs 
but it should also assist in increased production.

                Experience in the last 14 years has shown that it is 
the high rainfall areas that can lead Australia to greater production. 
This is demonstrated by the fact that sown pastures in Australia have 
increased from 14 million to 40 million acres. Fertilised pastures
have increased from 11 million to 28 million acres. Indeed, the 
production in Western Victoria and south-east of South Australia, 
both areas of great pasture improvement, have increased more rapidly 
than almost anywhere else in Australia.

                In addition, there is the Government's decision on wool 
promotion in which the Government accepted the proposals that were put
to it by the wool industry leaders. This decision could cost the 
Government £4M. to £5M a year, depending on the wool growers own decision
concerning promotion.   It gives an indication, however, of the regard 
the Government has for wool industry leaders and can further be taken 
as an indication of the kind of co-operation that wool industry leaders 
will receive when the marketing recommendation goes forward.

                Also, stabilization and bounty measures for the dairy 
industry have been continually improved.

                Further, the Government's decision to reduce estate 
duty levied by the Commonwealth will have a significant effect on
small holdings.   This is.a reduction that applies to all farms or 
properties whether rural or in the towns. These reductions are quite 
significant. An estate valued at £20,000 will have its estate duty 
reduced by 66%;'ohe valued at £30,000 will have its estate duty reduced 
by slightly over 30%. This measure was put into effect at the time of 
the last Budget and will affect small farms and businesses everywhere.

                This expansion in Australia's great rural industries 
has largely provided the overseas funds that Australia has needed for 
the vigorous growth that has been pursued. These industries are still 
the corner stone of Australia's progress and will continue to be so for 
the whole century.

                            ----eCo----

