<!--start metadata-->
Title: Restrictive trade practices
Description: press statement
Date: 22/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        PRESS STATEiENT:
        NiALCOLNì FRASER:

                                                             November 22nd,1963


                           In the next Parliament the Government will legislate to 
        control restrictive trade practices with two prime purposes in mind. They 
        will be to protect the small trader and the other will be to outlaw 
        practices that are against the public interests.
                           It is now one year since detailed tentative proposals
        were placed before the Parliament.   These have attracted considerable
        criticism, as was intended.   The Government now has the benefit of
•       these criticisms, some constructive and some destructive. It will be 
        in a position in the new Parliament to legislate.
                           There are some people who say there has been undue 
        delay in this matter. The Government, however, has wanted to be sure of 
        its intentions and of its proposals because the legislation will have
         far reaching effects.  It is not legislation that any Government should
         enter lightly or hurriedly. It is worth remembering that the first 
         decision to do something about this matter in England was made in 1948.
        This resulted in legislation eight years later in 1956.  The present 
•        Commonwealth Government has been involved in this matter for about 
         half, this time and has brought itself to a stage where it feels able to
         legislate.
                           Bearing in mind the principle that I have outlined,
         the legislation will, I believe, be of great value and will be one 
         more reform, perhaps one of the most significant, that has been 
         introduced by the present Government.


                                          000

