<!--start metadata-->
Title: Unemployment, education
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 22/10/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                      3HA - Sunday, 22 October 
                      3YB - Thursday, 26 October 
                      3I,K - Wednesday, 25 October
    BROADCAST


         For some time, the level of unemployment in Australia 
    has concerned the Commonwealth. Obviously our objective of 
    full employment was not being achieved, and we have been taking 
    steps to improve the situation.

         Apart from general measures to stimulate the national 
    economy, we have paid particular attention to the problems 
    of the country through our non-Metropolitan Unemployment Relief 
•   Scheme. The rural areas are particularly sensitive and 
    susceptible to changes in the employment pattern, and we are 
    paying out $4* million a month to local authorities and other 
    government and semi-government employers of non-metropolitan 
    workers with the specific aim of keeping country people in 
    country jobs.

         I'm mentioning all this because the latest statistics 
    show a significant improvement in the employment situation during 
    September. The number of people registered with the Commonwealth 
    Employment Service throughout Australia fell by 7,928, or more 
    than 8 per cent, while unfilled vacancies rose by 4,430 or more 
•   than 15 per cent.

         These movements were greater than usual for this time 
    of year. In fact, in the last two years, there were increases. 
    Here in Western Victoria, it is heartening to note that the 
    latest figures showed decreases in numbers of registered 
    unemployed at Horsham, Hamilton and Warrnambool.

         I don't want anyone to think I'm attempting to paint 
    a rosy picture of the employment situation here in Western 
    Victoria or in Australia as a whole. Unemployment can mean 
    hardship, and in country areas, real hardship. There's no such




                            .../2

                      - 2 --






      thing as a desirable amount of unemployment in a community, and 
      as long as anyone is unable to find work, the Commonwealth will 
      be dissatisfied.


             That I'm trying to show is that the employment position 
      is showing considerable improvement, and represents a significant 
      pick-up in the Australian economy overall. The new budget 
      measures designed to act as a stimulus are having an effect. 
      Western Victoria, like the rest of Australia, is beginning to 
      feel the advantages of that budget.


             Last week, it was my privilege to introduce into 
      Federal Parliament bills to give effect to the triennial 
      programmes for universities and colleges of advanced education. 
      Over the next three years, something like $1467 million will 

      be spent on these tertiary institutions, almost half as much 
      again as the programmes for the 1970-72 triennium., Of this, 
      the Commonwealth will provide directly $665 million.


             Even more startling is the programme for colleges of 
      advanced education - $450 million representing an increase of 
      78 per cent. There has been a dramatic upsurge in the development 
      of colleges in the last few years, and, as the new programme 
      demonstrates, this dynamism is continuing into the years 
•     immediately ahead of us.


             Of course, the college which concerns me most is the 
      Warrnambool Institute of Advanced Education, and I want to say 
      one or two things about it. First, this isn't just something 
      for Warrnambool, but the tertiary institution serving the whole 
      of south-western Victoria and, as such, an institution of which 
      we can all be very proud. Recent suggestions that there should 
      be another college established at Portland demonstrate a complete 
      ignorance of the role of the Warrnambool Institute. Indeed, if 
      the proposal were implemented, tertiary education throughout the 
      Aaole region would suffer greatly by the spreading of resources 
      too thinly and the establishment of an institute at Portland at






                                          .../3

               -3



    the expense of a relatively new one at Warrnambool. Clearly the 
    first priority must be the proper development of the Warrnambool 
    Institute, to the advantage of the entire south-western 
    Victorian community. Personally, I believe the introduction of 
    teacher training at the institute is a key to its growth, and I 
    will be pressing for this where and when I can.

         Finally, there has been some comment from time to time 
    in the press about the allocation of funds to colleges of 
    advanced education. The Australian Commission on Advanced 
    Education recommends programmes to the Commonwealth, and for the 
    coming three years, proposed that the Warrnambool Institute 
•   should be allocated $1,850,000 for capital expenditure and 
    $2,105,900 for recurrent spending. The significant feature 
    here is that every recommendation of the commission for every 
    individual college in Australia has been accepted by the 
    Commonwealth.

         The Government is firmly committed to the development 
    of the colleges of advanced education in Australia. Within 
    the limits of our capacity, we will do everything we can to 
    further that development.



•

