<!--start metadata-->
Title: Government assistance, free enterprise, Anzac day
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 25/04/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     BROADCAST          3LK Tuesday, 25 April
                               1972.


         Earlier this month I was privileged to speak at a 
     Liberal Speakers' Group Conference along with two of my 
     colleagues, the Treasurer, Mr Snedden, and the Minister for 
     Labour and National Service, Mr Lynch.
         As a result of my contribution to the Conference I found 
     myself criticized in one newspaper for allegedly arguing that 
     the Government has a limited moral obligation to help the weak 
     and the underprivileged in the community.
•        Nothing could be further from the truth. In fact my 
     argument was largely designed to demonstrate the kind of attitude 
     I believe a government should adopt if it is to be able to provide 
     the increasing welfare benefits constantly demanded by Australians 
     today.
         At the Conference I touched on what I believe should be 
     a fundamental objective of governments. It is this which I wish 
     to enlarge upon now, because in an election year it is most 
     important that you should have placed before you the principles 
     by which we in the Government, and our opponents, stand.
         Australians are enterprising people. We all have 
     aspirations for ourselves and our families, and we strive through 
•    our own efforts to achieve the goals we set ourselves. Sometimes 
     our aims are specific - a house, a car, a certain education for 
     our children. Often they are more general - an improvement in 
     our quality of life, our environment, in the assistance we can 
     give to the sick, aged and underprivileged.
         A government in a free enterprise community such as ours 
     must be in tune with these factors. It must give great attention 
     to those areas of social responsibility in which Australians demand 
     constant improvement. Indeed, the present Government does that, 
     and in the last five years our spending on welfare benefits of all 
     kinds has increased by $700 million to about $2,000 million 
     in this financial year.


                               ..12

r

                  2.


          But in our desire to stress the importance a government 
      must attach to the whole area of welfare, we should avoid the 
      situation where a government is judged solely on the size of the 
      increase in the welfare payments it can offer. The government 
      should more reasonably be judged on the extent to which it 
      provides the opportunity for individuals to prosper through their 
      own efforts and enterprise. Personal initiative must be
      encouraged, not stifled, for in the long run a government cannot 
      continue to offer improvements and increases in pensions and other 
      such benefits unless it contributes to the general prosperity 
      of the community by helping to create the right economic climate.

 •        It is from the productive sector that the community draws 
      its economic strength which is so vital if we are to achieve those 
      personal and national goals to which I refer.

          In areas such as Western Victoria, government activity 
      towards this end is perhaps most apparent in the primary production 
      sector. Look closely at recent government moves in the areas such 
      as wool, meat and dairying, and you will see what I mean.
          Avoiding socialist impositions, the Government has 
      directed its attention to creating the sort of conditions under 
      which the productive capacity of farmers and graziers can be 
      maximised within our free enterprise framework.

          You can see that principle lying behind the establishment 
 •    of the Deficiency Payment Scheme and the Australian Wool Commission. 
      As you know, under the first the Government guarantees a
      minimum return to wool growers of 36¢ a pound. Under the second, 
      the Commission intervened to support the price of wool at auction. 
      Who knows how far the price would have dropped last year had the 
      Commission not been buying.

          The recent developments in areas such as dairying - the 
      Commonwealth's agreement to expand the important dairy industry 
      Research Scheme - and in meat - the 7.2% increase in export quotas 
      to the United States - all reflect the same spirit of helping to 
      provide the opportunity for the individual to pursue his own 
      course. To do otherwise, to attempt to direct and determine his 
      destiny, would be unreasonable, unwarranted and unAustralian.



                              ../3

r


                  3.

          If governments are to shoulder successfully the
      mounting burdens of social responsibility, then this can 
      only be achieved by assisting to a maximum extent the productive 
      sector of our community. It is on our success to achieve this 
      that we, as a Government, should face the Community's judgement.
          I cannot conclude today without referring to Anzac
      Day.
          Today we remember those who gave their lives for their 
      country, not only in those distant days at Gallipoli 57 years ago, 
      but in all the conflicts in which Australians have been involved 
      since that time.
 •        These days, when so many of our traditional values 
      are being called into question, Anzac Day is perhaps a suitable 
      time for us to consider whether those values still have application 
      to our contemporary society.
          Is patriotism an outdated concept? Or the willingness 
      to fight for freedom for our families, ourselves and our fellow 
      men?
          Thousands of Australians have died for those principles 
      and today we remember them.
          I firmly believe those principles are as valid in today's 
      changing world as they ever were, and may the memory of those 
 •    who have fallen constantly remind us of that.



                oo00oo00oo00oo

