<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget increases
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 15/09/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                      3HA - 15/9/57 
                                      3YB - 18/9/57

                4 fhASBR 1EMBS' FOR WANNO 
                   reports 4n
                  BUDGET MUASB&



        In this report am eking to shag what changes this last



Budgehas made in pensions and social sex ices of different kinds.
         would like you to remember that when T mention a rise of 


7/6d. a week or a few shillings for this

                               is sumi.led up into one total it

sound to you extremely small but when it benefit or that benefit, it may
moans many many millions of pounds.

        For instance, war end repatriation services are going to cost

over 2.129 million in this year and social services, which include age and 

invalid rensione and medical benefits, will be costing the huge total 


of £244 millionthat gives a grand total of £3721 million - this is

more than a guar ter of our total federal Budget.

        The special rate war pension for the totally and permanently 


   apecitated is being increased by /- a week, making a pension of 

£11 a week. The general rate war pension will be increased by 7/6d. 


 a week, and there are proportionate increases for pensioners receiving


 only a part of the pension.

        The war widow's pension has also been increased to £4/17/6d.


 a week, while the domestic allowance payable on account of children


        increased to £E a week.

        The age and invalid pausions have been increased by 7/6d.


     7/64. a week, and the Lego increase has been granted to widows. 

        Unemployment and sickness benefit rotes will be increased 

 by amounts ranging from 15/- a week for a single adult to 4/7/6 for a


 man with a wife and one or more children.

         Allowances to single and married people suffering from T.B.


 have also been increased. In addition to increasing the rates payable 

 to the old and to the sick, the Government to also going to increase the 

 assistance given by the Commonwealth to hospital patients to help them 

 meet their accounts for hospital treatment. At prciaent the Common- 


 wealth bed allowance is 8/- a day, together with un additional 4/-d. 


 if the patient is u member of some hospital insurance organisation. 

 This ad;.1ittonal benefit for insured patients will be 12/-d. a day in

p101 of the previous 4/-4. a day. The fact that the increase has been 
made for inaured patientc as opposed to the uninsured only underlies the 
feet that if we excepthelp from the Governs-lei-two Aunt also, 1f we can, 
help ourselves. The rates of insurance under hospital ana medical
benefits scheme are not large. I think the maximum family rate that 
can be paid is £12 a year, and in many cases considerable benefits can 
be had for much smaller payments which couBbe paid weekly. I think it 
is very worth while people making sure that they and their families are 
inured, Lad it is well worth while them keeping -- their payments when 
they are well Bo that the benefits will be made available to them if they 
or their families come to need theme
         These pension and wer repatriation     s will
£20,000,000 in u full ;leer.
         cue of the best Bohemia that the Govornwnt has introduced to 
help the old has been the subsidy to approved organisations which them 
selves raise funds for building hams for the uged. In the past the 
Government has contributed el for every £1 found by the orkraniention. 
In the future the Commonwealth subsidy will be £2 for every pound found 
by an organisation to build a home for the old people. The maximum that 
the Government will grant in any one year under this scheme will increase
from one and a halt to three million pounds. Thin scheme has had 
marked success throughout the Comwnwedlth and many old people now find 
themselves in decent homes wnare before nothing would have been provided 
for them. It is ma example of co-operation between private eitizene and
the Government.  If you do something to help yourself the Government 
gives to the party that additional help which encourages local groups and 
organisations to take advantage of the assistuace that is available. I 
know in my own electorate that people have taken advantage of this scheme 
under w:,ich homes for the aged can be built, and I believe they fully 
realise the benefits that have come from it.


                                                  /1his covers

        This covers briefly t•he changes in war and repatriation 
services, and in social services, which are being made by the
Budget. The changes may sound small in themselves, but when 
they ere added up in total they cost quite a lot of money, 
and it is worth remembering that no-one gets anything for 
nothing, and whet the Government appe &rs to give in reality 
comes from the taxpayer. 4o if these additional benefits 
have been made possible in this Budget, they have been made 
possible by the greater bouyanay throughout the economy by 
wise management, by a better balance of trade, and last but 
not least, by the efforts of av y working Australien whose taxes 
make up the sum total of our wealth out of which benefits and 
allowances are paid to the old an, tho sict to the people who 
need hel





1     7.

