<!--start metadata-->
Title: Review of 1973, migration, economy
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 17/12/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 FOR I2TFO17MAfiI'ON OF PIMSS' GALLERY                                                     EMBARGO: Sunday, 17th
         w                                                                                                       December, 1973.

                       ELECTORAL STATEMENT BY THE HON, MALCOLM 
                       FRASER, M.P.„ MEMBER FOR WANNON - 17thDECEMBER(              1973. 

              In many respects it has been a muddled and difficult year. 
  Feople in Australia believe that the sense of direction and 
 general purpose that has for so long characterised Australia's 
 national force has been replaced by changes in attitude, 
 policy and outlook, which the majority of Australians do not 
 like. Within Australia attempts have been made to turn many 
 aspects of life upside-down. People who are buying their own 
 home and who have been promised low interest rates, find that 
 interest rates of 9 to 14 percent are now common.

             Farmers who were promised interest rates of 3 percent
 are paying 9 percent or more on their general overdraft.
 Small businesses are likely to have the problem of a shortage
 of cash. If the average person conducting a small business
 is to pay a high rate or interest for his finance, he can be placed
 in a very difficult situation indeed if trading fortunes change.


            There is a degree of uncertainty throughout the community. 
New investment decisions are not being made. Oil search is 
 running down and mineral search is being pursued much less vigor- 
ously than in the past. The Government's policies are throwing 
these industries into a state of turmoil.

            We have found that there were extensive efforts to place 
an export tax on Australian meat. The stupidity of that move 
was clearly shown. Employment figures over the last year 
have generally been good, but there are some signs of
slackening of the demand for labour in the last few weeks of this 
year, and I am very concerned indeed about the employment
position for 1974. This is traditionally a time when tens and 
thousands of school leavers seek to enter the work force 
and they might well be trying to do this when a general down-turn 
in the Australian economy is imminent.

                        2.

     These are unhealthy signs.  Rates of interest are much
too high. Everything from nails to electric motors is in
short supply.   I am told that because of the shortages of
essential components many manufacturers will be forced to
reduce labour in the coming year, not because they can't
sell commodities at the present time, but they can't
get components from other suppliers or from overseas.
I would not be at all surprised if this does in fact
occur because I have visited a number of establishments which
have been employing more labour than they can fully use
at the moment hoping that they would be able to get supplies
so that they can give their employees work to perform.
This situation does not seem to be improving.

     Everything I have mentioned in this talk so far is 
an Australian phenomenon - high interest rates and
uneasiness in the business investment sector. On top of 
that we have a very dangerous economic situation Dverseas. 
Interest rates in many countries are even higher than in 
Australia. National economic policies have, in a number
of instances, failed.  In addition there are the Arab oil 
restrictions which could well lead to a significant
lessening of trade between countries and to major unemployment 
in most of the Western countries - Europe, 3ritain, America 
and Japan.

     The Government has tried to suggest that Australia will 
be insulated from these moves. We are fairly independent 
in motor fuel, but for industrial and bunkering fuel we
are dependent on overseas supplies. If the economies of 
other countries are knocked about, if there is a very 
signficant down-turn in Japanese business activities, if 
there is major unemployment in Japan and in Europe, if 
world trade sinks down into the depths and there is every 
indication that it will, then that is bound to have an 
impact on Australia. The policies of the present Government
will re-inforce that impact. There is no indication yet 
that the present Government has the slightest awareness

                         3.

  of these dangers and the possible implications for the 
  employment of tens of thousands of Australian people.

      This was a Government that was meant to show compassion 
 for the average Australian. How is that compassion matched 
 with interest rates which makes it extraordinarly difficult 
 for the average person starting out in life to build or buy 
 their own home. How does that compassion match when
 people in country areas struggling to establish de-centralised 
 industries or to maintain and improve farms must pay interest
 at 9 or 10 percent a year.  It is a cruel situation and 
 one that has been forced upon this country by the present
 Government.

     when there has been employment running at too high a
 level the migrant community is often hardest hit. Special 
 measures need to be taken to make sure that no one section 
 of the community carries an undue share of any difficulties
 that might arise.  In spite of a great deal of talk there is 
 much remaining to be done to see that migrants are aware 
 of the rights and services that are available to all
 Australians.

     Contact with migrant community committees convinced 
me that Government agencies alone are inadequate for the 
 task needed of them. Government agencies and services need 
 further extension, they need more interpretors and sometimes 
they need more patience with people who may not understand
the Australian system.  In addition to that there ought to 
be more Commonwealth Government support for the various 
welfare committees which have been and are being established 
by the migrant communities.

     There are immense migrant language problems in Australia. 
Government Departments themselves are repeatedly asking

           4

voluntary migrant community welfare officers, who are 
overworked in their own capacity, to serve as interpretors 
because the Government itself cannot provide them.

  As Liberal Party Spokesman on migration as well as 
Labour, I am looking at the problems created by this 
situation. I have so far seen enough to know there are 
many difficult human problems that the general community i; 
not aware of and which the general services of Government 
are ill-equipped to cope with. The migrant welfare 
committees are well placed to provide additional assistance. 
They are largely voluntary, but they need more support 
and much greater recognition for the very valuable services 
they are undertaking.

