<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool Research Bill
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 2/06/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                      3HA - 2/6/1957
          WOOL RESEARCH Bl~ ~, 1.98? . ~v~3 ~ 5/6/1957
 itt Comments By: Malcolm Fraser, Member far Wannon.

      e last week of the Session, a small 3ilà. called the 
Wool Re wer+ h Bill, 198?, was passed through both Houses of the 
Federal Parliament. It had the unanimous approval of every 4wisber 
of both Houses.
    The rain purposes of the Bill was to mako mire that there 
would be sufficient funds available for research in the future. Some 
people may think that with the export income from wool running into 
about MO million this year, research is unnecessary, but nothing is 
further from the truth.
    Wool provides more than 50% of all our export earnings. 
Upon it depeuds the prosperity not only of wool-growers but of the 
many hundreds and thouaanda of people who provide goods and services 
of one kind or another . In addition to this, it is our wool .income 
that makes it possible for us to buy the overseas goods that this 
country needs for its continued development and progress.
    I agree that, If possible, we should make ouretvea lese 
dependent upon wool by increasing our exports of other commodities -- 
of seconda' y industry goods and of metals in particular. But the 
does not mean that we should neglect wool and that we should not make 
sure that we can get all the income that in possible for the wool 
that we sell to the markets of the world. To do t is, we need to 
increase our production and to improve our quality -- the quality 
not only of wool as it is grown on the sheep but the finished quality 
of the woven fabric.
    In the past we have at times been frightened of the threat 
of synthetics and as the price of wool rises, so the possibility of 
competition from synthetics becomes more real because the price 
margin in favour of wool is lowered.
    There are some thinks that synthetic cloths and fabrics can 
do that woollen ones can't at the present time. rAame synthetic 
cloths can be made creaseless or very nearly so but this advantages 
has not yet been found in any woollen material.

     People interested in synthetics are spending £20 million 
a year on research and they are constantly improving their product.
     It is vital for everyone concerned in the wool industry 
arid tho Australian Government to take the matter of research mast 
seriously so that we may constantly and forever stave drf the 
ohallenge of synthetic fibres.
     This new Bill will increase the hinds available for 
research. The Government's a)ntribution will rise from 2/- to 
4/- per bale and the wool-growers' contributioz: will remain at p3/- 
a bit). Based on current levels of production this should give the 
fool Research Fund about 21.7 million each year and this is slightly 
in excess of the current level of expenditure on research.
     In addition to this 6/- that is going to be spent on 
research, the 4/- growers' contribution for wool promoticn remains. 
We will now heave the two activities running side by side - wool 
research and wool promotion - both are of course vitally important 
and are complementary to each other.
     A new Wool Research Committee has been set up comprising 
Mine members appointed by the Minister for krimery Industry. On 
that Committee two Bombers will be nominated by the Australian Wool 
Growers' Council; two will be nominated by the Australian Wool
and Meat Vroducers' Federation; the Chairman of the Australian Wool 
Bureau will be a member and there will be û represenLative from 
the Associated Woollen and Worsted Manufeeturers of Australia in 
addition to one from the Universities which engage in research
relating to wool, and finally, there will be a representative from 
the C.S.I.R.O.
     This Bill will make sure that research in the woollen 
 industry will be maintained at an adequate Nad high level to ensure
 a continuing flow of funds to auch bodies as the C.S.I.R.O. who 
will carry out research work.
     Australia still rides on thebheep's back and looks like 
doing so as far as we can see into the future. It is up to u to 
 make sure that our technical knowledge of these matters remains 
 superior to that of any other country. Only if this is done will 
 wool continue to be of great and lasting benefit to Australia.
           1111111111.004.1•IMIIMINIMII....^
 28/5/1957.

