<!--start metadata-->
Title: Long service leave, wharf labourers
Description: press statement
Date: 18/06/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                PRESS STATEMENT
                                                             June 18th,1961
                          During the last few days of the Autumn Session the 
                minister for Labour, Mr. McMahon, introduced a Bill to give Long 
                Service Leave to regular wharf labourers. This legislation was 
                strongly attacked by the Labour Party on the ground that certain 
                conditions were attached to this privilege. The Labour Party 
                argued that Long Service Leave was a right, and that there should 
                be no strings attached to it. The Government, on the other hand, 
                argues that the wharf industry represents special problems and 
                special methods are needed to overcome these problems.
                          It is well known that the history of the waterfront has 
                been a turbulent one, and industrial peace has never endured for
                more than a short period of time.  This might, to some extent, 
                be due to the nature of the industry, but it is in no small 
                measure due to the leadership of the industry.
                           In 1959 the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission
                made a new comprehensive award for the waterfront. This gave 
                substantial advantages to the waterside workers Federation and 
•               there was then reason to hope that the new charter for the water- 
                front and the new code of conditions of employment would begin 
                an era of peace. These hopes were not fulfilled. In 1958-59 
                there was loss of 345 thousand man-hours on the waterfront. 
                In 1959-60 the loss rose to over 800 thousand, while in the first 
                half of 1960-61 nearly as many man-hours were lost as were lost 
                in the whole of the previous year.
                           Over the last five years nearly 30% of the total 
                days lost for industrial disputes in Australia have been lost by 
                some 20 thousand waterside workers out of well over 3 million 
                wage and salary earners. That is 30'0 of total days lost have 
                been lost by 1% of the wage and salary earners. This is an 
                appalling record, and it is a record that is vitally important 
•               to Australia because delays on the waterfront increase our

                costs of transport; increase the costs of shipping our primary 
                produce abroad. The delays on the waterfront give the Conference 
                Lines Shipping Companies their principal arguments for increasing 
                the cost of freight from Australia to the markets of the world.
                           Partly as a result of this process, over the last 
                four years over 4,000 waterside workers have lost their jobs, 
                because mot the interstate shipping has almost gone out of business. 
                If cargoes can be shipped overland they are shipped overland. 
                However, so far as overseas trade is concerned there is no 
                alternative but to ship our goods by sea. What the waterside 
                workers have done in increasing our costs is of vital importance 
                to Australia for the simple reason that as many other things do 
                it bears heavily on primary producers.
                            47/ of all the hours lost in 1959-60 were lost in 107 
                unauthorised 24-hour port stoppages and this, despite the machinery 
                available for the resolving of industrial disputes, and the 
                Commission's decision in 1959 that each Branch could hold eight
                half-day stop work meetings a year. In addition to this, if

                                        -   2 -
               a Branch can show the Commission that there is good reason to have 
               an additional stoppage this can be applied for from the Commission.

                        However, the great bulk of the stoppages on the waterfront 
               are completely unauthorised. It is quite clear legitimate 
               industrial disputes can and do arise on the waterfront. There 
               is machinery to overcome these disputes and it doesn't require a
               stoppage of the whole port to overcome them. When you analyse 
               why the bulk of unauthorised stoppages have been held you find 
               that very often as not the cause of the stoppage has nothing 
               whatever to do with industrial conditions on the waterfront. 
               Stoppages have been called to try and muster support for Castro's 
               Cuba or for the communist led peace fronts - Ban the Atom Bombs-; 
               and the press attitude to Unity Tickets; Crimes Act; Actions by 
               State Governments and other subjects have been discussed at these
               stop-work meetings.  These are not industrial matters; stoppages 
               should not be tolerated.. to discuss these matters.
                         What would a Factory Manager say if his men decided to 
               stop work to discuss the press attitude to current political 
•              problems - matters that had nothing whatever to do with their own 

               particular employment. This is what waterside workers have done, 
               not once but many times.

                          It is worth noting that waterside workers do not pay 
               for stoppages, they do not lose wages. On the contrary, they can 
               often gain increased pay as a result of stoppages. If a factory 
               stops work the production is something that is never caught up, 

               but if the wharf stops work the ships are still there to be
               unloaded or to be loaded, and if there is a backlog of ships that 

               means working overtime at time and a hall or at double time rates. 
               Even if a port stops work for twentyfour hours, for two days, or 
               for a week the work is still there and the work still has to be 
               done- the waterside worker is still going to get paid often at 
•              penalty rates. It is Australia that pays for these stoppages 

               because of the increased cost of transport.

                          It is true that the Union can be fined the maximum 
               of x;500, but when you work it out it cojes to 6d. per members, and 

               a fine of 6d. per member for a waterside worker is a pretty remote 
               business and does not deter him from holding the stoppages.

                           It was for all these reasons that the Government felt 
               it necessary and indeed vital to try and have some strings attached 
               to the long service leave that is going to be made available to 
               waterside workers.

                           The privileges are firstly these. A man will get 
               three months long service leave after 20 years qualifying service, 
               and 6-i- weeks for each subsequent 10 years. This is at continuous 
               ports, and by that it is meant that where men have to attend daily 

               throughout the year.

                            The strings tied to these privileges are these. If 
               there was a port stoppage involving more than 250 or one-third 
               of the men at the port, the men involved will lose certain benefits 

               unless the Union can satisfy the Conciliation and Arbitration

                                           3
              Commission that the stoppage was justified. For every day of such 
              an unauthorised port stoppage the men involved will lose attendance 
              money on four occasions when they would otherwise receive it, and 
              their qualifying period for long service leave will be deferred 
              by the day or will be deferred by up to a month as the Conciliation 
              and Arbitration Commission determines.
                      It is worth noting that this first proposal is not new. 
              under the Arbitration Act the Stevedoring Industry Authority can now 
              suspenckattendance money where there is concern at mass action. In 
              addition, the second provision appears in the Coal Mining Act, 
              where men take part in unauthorised stoppages the period lost is 
              deducted from the qualifying period for long service. The purpose 
              of this provision, especially the lost of attendance money, is to 
              try to bring home to every individual waterside that when he is 
              taking part in an unauthorised stoppage he is going to have to 
              bear some cost of that stoppage. In the past he has taken part in
              the stoppage anti has experienced no penalty. There has been no 
              loss of wages because the ships have still had to be unloaded at 
•             some future time and, as I have said, at penalty rates.
                       On the other hand, for waterside workers with a sense of 
              responsibility, not only to their Union but also to the ivatioi&nd 
              with some desire to improve conditions on the waterfront in relation 
              to transport costs, then there is a very real benefit in the form 
              of the long service leave that I have mentioned. It is only to be 
              hoped that the thinking watersiders, whom I am confident are in 
              a majority, will now exert their influence to a greater degree than 
              in the past and not follow blindly where the leaders of the industry 
              dictate. The legislation passed in the last Parliament gives such 
              men the opportunity and the incentive to stand out against 
              unauthorised stoppages and to do something to reduce the
•             tremendous loss of man hours on the waterfront.

