<!--start metadata-->
Title: Outside control of the Labour [sic] Party
Description: press statement
Date: 25/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        PRESS STATENENT

        MALCOLM FRASER a



                                                              November 25th,1963



                             OUTSIDE CONTROL OF LABOUR PARTY 

                             Malcolm Fraser said at Port Fairy -
                             A vote for Mr. Calwell would, in fact, be a vote 

        to the Australian Labour Party Conference and Federal Executive. These 

        are composed of people unknown to the Australian public who meet and 

        determine Labour Party policy. Under their rules both these bodies have 

        the power to direct Federal members of the Party on any matter.

                             Earlier in this year we saw how Mr. Calwell had 

        to ask what Labour Party policy should be on the North West Cape. Many


•       of the national press published ignominious pictures of the Leader and 

        the Deputy Leader standing at the doors of the Kingston Hotel in Canberra 

        while the Conference deliberated and decided its policy.

                             As a general rule Labour Party politicians are not 

        on the Labour Party Conference or Executive. These people are chosen 

        by the State Organizations of the Labour Party. They are men who are not 


        elected by the Australian people, who have no responsibility to you and 

        I as electors. Under these arrangements a Labour Party politician, and 

        this includes Mr. Calwell, when elected to Parliament is primarily

•       responsible to the Executive and Conference of his Party. This is the 

        reverse of the proper democratic process where politicians should be 

        primarily responsible to their electorate and to the people of Australia 

        at large.

                             This is made more absurd when you consider that the

        Federal body, the Conference, meets only every two years, unless an

        emergency meeting is called, which rarely happens. Thus, at one meeting,

        held every second year, this Conference is meant to lay down Labour 

        policy on internal and foreign affairs for guidance and direction of 

        Labour Party politicians.




                                         o0ó

