<!--start metadata-->
Title: Local Government, Grants Commission
Description: Broadcast
Date: 27/05/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                             ,44





RADIO BROADCAST                  Sunday, 27th May 3HA
TIÌE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.   Wednesday, 30th May 3LK
                                 Thursday, 31st May 3YB





Last week, a bill was introduced into the House of Representatives 
which could be of significant assistance to local governing 
bodies. The bill will give local government bodies access 
to the Grants Commission.

It is the Government's intention that local governing
bodies should form themselves into groups, which would
be approved by the Commonwealth Minister for Urban and
Regional Development. Once the groups had been established,
an organisation representing them would then be able to make
an application to the Special Minister of State, who
would decide whether the application for support would
go to the Grants Commission or not. The Prime Minister,
I think, described the proposal as a topping up proposal
to assist shires which had standards below those in
neighbouring shires or regions.

As it appears, the proposal will therefore not be one 
that will provide some general assistance for all shires. 
One of the problems of the approach that has been adopted 
is that a shire that has taxed itself relatively highly, 
as most have in Western Victoria, could be penalised 
because it has established services and facilities of a 
higher standard than a shire that was not so heavily taxed.

There are many features that come into this. Some local 
government areas are basically better off than others, 
and we won't really know until the procedures start to 
work how much benefit there will be for particular local 
government areas. I will be sending local government bodies 
a copy of the Prime Minister's speech and a copy of the 
bill, so they can study it.

There are other problems associated with this measure. 
Local government bodies are established by State law and 
I believe a much more suitable solution would have been 
one that provided the States with adequate finance so that 
they could make the extra money available to local
government bodies and municipalities. That would preserve 
the position of the local government and of the States.

Mr. Whitlam has repeatedly said that he is in favour of 
a unitary State. By that he means a State in which all 
substantial powers reside in Canberra. I do not believe 
that that would be good for Australia.' If the States 
are destroyed, there can be no check against a central 
Government and any democracy needs to work in a system 
of checks and balance.


                                     ... 2

                   - 2






There will be some advantage for some local government 
areas. In the strict terms of the Prime Minister's 
speech and of the bill, there will be many areas that 
will not benefit from these particular proposals, but 
that has yet to be determined. I suppose it is
possible that the Grants Commission could decide that 
all local government areas need additional finance and 
that they would therefore all get some extra support. 
If all local government bodies do get extra support, I 
would applaud it, because with the increased responsib- 
ilities being put upon them, they need extra funds. 
Often those responsibilities are put upon them by acts 
of government offering a subsidy for one service or 
another, so long as the local government body does 
something on its own account. They are now expected 
to provide services over a much wider field than 
was once the case.

While I want additional funds to be available, I very 
much regret the mechanism that the Government has chosen, 
because I think it is cumbersome and unnecessary, and 
I believe that an approach that would have provided 
payments based on the numbers of inhabitants to all 
local government bodies, would have been reasonable, 
so long as you coupled it with special provisions which 
would tackle areas of particular disability or hardship. 
I welcome the intention, therefore, to provide additional 
funds for shires and municipalities. I don't like the 
way it's being done, because it will seriously undermine 
the authority of States, which I believe needs to be 
maintained as a check against arbitrary centralised 
power in Canberra.

