<!--start metadata-->
Title: Aboriginal Affairs, Thursday Island turtle farm, Labor Government
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 14/10/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA               PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

       HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES              CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2800 
                                             TEL. 721211







                                     E BL.RGO: Sunday,

                                              14 October.



FOR INFORMATION OF PRESS GALLERY





     ELECTORAL ‚TAT:CÔ∞iEN'1 BY `i'IiL IiON. I∞li1LCOLM FPASER, M.P., 

     T;IBLI FOR WANiTON, SUNDAY, lll- OCTOBER, 1973- 





      Few people would have thought that turtles could have 


disturbed the Federal Parliamentary scene. Few people would 


have thought that turtles could have been the centre of a 


potential scandal involving some of the major figures in 


government.



      During the last week this has become a real possibility.



      There is a turtle farm on Thursday Island. It has been 


sponsored by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. A 


considerable. quantity of money has been involved in the


project.   It is designed to help establish an industry which 


Aborigines and Thursday Islanders could ultimately look after 


for themselves.



      There was a report in the Telegraph on 11 October 


which has pointed out that the Auditor-General, Mr. Steele 


Craik, has seized files dealing with the scheme, and that 


Mr. Craik had acted after reports of a massive waste of 


Government money on the scheme.



      The next step was a move by Senator Georges, a Labor 


Senator from ueensland, in the Senate, in which he sought 


to defend the deposed Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, 


Gordon Bryant, against hr. Barry Dexter, Head of the Department 


of Aboriginal Affairs, and Dr. Coombs, the Prime Minister's 


special adviser. Senator Georges referred critically to 


both of them in relation to their alleged activities against


the Minister, Mr. Bryant.  Mr. Dexter had apparently earlier 


accused Mr. Bryant of interfering with the turtle farm project


by delaying the reduction in the number of turtles. tie


said that Hr. Bryant had commandeered a lugger being used


in the project.  This in fact is what the newspaper report


allaged.

                        2.

     Mr. Bryant later denied that charge.  The document
which is alleged to have been quoted by Senator Georges went 
on tJ say: "I am reluctant however to tamper in any way with 
the company structure" - the quote "I"_, of course, is Mr. 
Dexter - "-hile it continues to be under assault and the 
Minister seeks to force his own nominess upon the Directors."
     Shortly before that document was written the newspaper 
goes on to say that hr. Bryant had appointed Senator Georges 
as the Chairman of the turtle farm project.
     The report said that Mr. Bryant was worried that nearly 
$450,000 profit by the Government was not being properly
spent.   The report went on to say that Labor back benchers 
were angry because Mr. Dexter's letter, and he is Head of the 
Department of Aboriginal Affairs, to Dr. Coombs related to 
evidence to be given before the House of Representatives 
Committee on the Environment and Conservation, and in that 
letter Mr. Dexter is alleged to have said to Dr. Coombs: 
"We should not assume that all those we will be talking to
will be interested in getting at the facts. I have no doubt 
that at least one of them will seek nothing less than the 
abandonment of the turtle farm project or of putting what 
remains of it after re-structuring under the direct control
of the Thursday Island Co-operative.  We should therefore 
exercise discretion in what we say, in particular in relation 
to those aspects we may not yet have determined - our own 
approach such as marketing."
      It was thought sufficiently Serious for the Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Bill Snedden, and the Prime Minister, 
Mr. Gough Whitlam, both to agree last Thursday night that 
this matter ought to be referred to the Privileges Committee.
A prima facie case would appear to be evident. It will 
depend very much on the view of the Speaker, but the 
Parliament certainly has not heard the last of the turtles 
of Thursday Island.


      During the week the Prime Minister announced some 
Ministerial changes. I regret the change of Gordon Bryant 
from Aboriginal Affairs, because he and his wife have both
devoted many years of service to the Aboriginal cause and

                         3.

both of them had a real feeling for the welfare of 
Aboriginals. I think Gordon Bryant wanted nothing more than 
to make a really worthwhile and lasting contribution to the 
well-being of the Aboriginal people, and it must have been a 
heavy blow to him to have that opportunity removed from him 
by the Ministerial changes.
      But I really do believe that the most foolish of the 
changes made by the Prime Minister was the one concerning 
Dr. Cairns. Many people have strong views about Jim Cairns, 
especially his views on foreign policy and overseas relation-
ships.   I have spoken to many people in industry in recent 
weeks and months who have said that Dr. Cairns has knuckled 
down to his job as Minister for Overseas Trade and Secondary 
Industry very well and very thoroughly listening to reasoned
arguments.   They believe that Dr. Cairns has argued for the 
cause and the needs Ûf his Departmental responsibilities well
and effectively.   This is something certainly to be praised. 
When Dr. Cairns was moved some industrial groups came out 
and thanked him for the work he had in fact done. Well,
Dr. Cairns has been moved.  The responsibility for Secondary 
Industry has been taken from him and Mr. Enderby, who has 
annoyed quite a few people in the A.C. T. , will be taking over
those responsibilities from him.  I think the Government 
would have been better served if Dr. Cairns had remained in 
charge. Not only of Overseas Trade, but also of Secondary 
Industry, where he had been doing a good job indeed.

      In these talks it is difficult sometimes to prevent
myself from becoming too critical of the Government. In 
view of the last few months, I think it is not surprising 
that that should be so. But now I want to say something 
about a Government policy of which I approve, which the
Liberal Party supports and which will be put into effect.
      A few days ago the Federal President of the Liberal Party 
pointed out that the Federal Rural Committee and the Federal 
Manufacturing Committee of the Liberal Party had given long 
and careful consideration to the question of .establishing 
the best and most equitable machinery for making recommendations

on assistance to Australian industries, both primary and 
secondary.
      As a national Party, Mr. Southey said, we accept that 
we have a responsibility to evolve policies which are to be 
for the benefit of all Australians and the objectives of the 
proposed Industries Assistance Commission are consistent with 
that aim. For many years the Federal Rural Committee of the 
Liberal Party has advocated that the granting or withdrawing 
of assistance to primary industries should be subjected to 
the same expert and impartial scrutiny which the Tariff Board 
has applied to secondary industry, and the acceptance of a 
body such as the Industries Assistance Commission would 
have prevented the rape of the rural sector by the present 
Government since it came to power. For example, if such a 
body had been in existence the Government could not, without 
any investigation or report, have taken such arbitrary action 
as abolishing the dairy subsidy, with all that it implies for 
the future of the industry, of individual farmers and of 
rural communities.
      There are many other actions that the Government has 
taken which ought to have been referred to such a body if
it had been in existence.  In addition, the public examination 
and report procedures of the proposed Industries Assistance 
Commission would greatly assist the urban and rural communities 
in gaining a better understanding of each other's difficulties 
and the growing inter-dependence of all sectors of the 
Australian economy would have been better understood.
      However compelling the arguments may be for assistance 
to any industry, primary or secondary, public awarness of the 
issues involved make it inevitable that any assistance
granted must be as a result of a full and open inquiry.
      Australian rural industries, which are amongst the most 
efficient in the world, would at least have a public forum
in which their case can be presented and argued. That was 
the substance of the statement put by hr. Southey.
      I believe it puts the arguments for. the Industries 
Assistance Commission quite clearly, and I am quite certain 
that if such a body as this does come into existence, as I. 
believe it ought, then we will have a situation in which

Y              5.
  the business that so often seems to mark the arguments 
  between the country and city interests will tend to fade away, 
  because we will realise that there is. an'.inter-dependence 
  between both sectors of the Australia economy, that we are 
  all really part of one economy.

