<!--start metadata-->
Title: Malcolm Fraser's first report from the United States
Description: United States visit 1964 - press statement
Date: 17/05/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRESS STATEIvENT:

                                                                    Washington,
                                                                    May l7th,1964


                     M LCOLM FRASER'S FIRST REPORT FROM THE UNITED STATES 


          FIRST IMPRESS IONS :

                      First impressions of a country are often very important for 
          they remain with a visitor as a vivid memory. It might have been expected 
          that a first visit to the United States would leave as a first impression 
          some sense of size, of wealth or of power, because these things are
          obviously true of this country.    However, in my case this was not so. 
          The first impression I received and one that is extraordinarily strong is 
          one of a very great hospitality and of a very real politeness from every- 
          one thom we have met. This is not just from people who might be involved 
          in organizing my program and visit to this country, it is something that 
          I have noticed from every person, whether it is someone serving behind a 
          counter in a shop, or a taxi driver, or people in the hotel or anywhere
          else.   These are, of course, characteristics of Americans abroad, but it 
          is noteworthy that they are not practised purely in foreign countries but 
          are characteristics that come naturally to the people of the United States. 
•         This is, of course, one of the reasons why I believe Australians and 
          Americans when they meet get on very well together for both our countries 
          show a generosity and a hospitality to visitors which is not always
          matched in other places.

          ARRANGEMENT OF PROGRAM:

                      The first few days in Washington have been busy organizing a 
          program and then arranging appointments with people in the various 
          Departments of State. In this coming week I will have several appoint- 
          ments with the State Department, which is the United States name for what
          we call our Department of External Affairs.   I will be speaking not only 
          with leaders in this Department, but in particular with people who are most 
          intimately concerned with South East Asian affairs. However, I have 
          already had an opportunity to meet people from the Department of Agriculture 
          and Secretes-7 Freeman, the head of that Department, impressed me very much 
          as a young, vigorous and able administrator in an extremely difficult 
          situation.
•         UNITED STAMS AGRICULTURE, AND AUSTRALIA:

                      In recent years the mechanization of United States farming has
          led to an enormous expans.kop, of output. This has brought problems, not 
          only for the United Stateor world trading conditions in some primary 
          commodities. For example, if the United States tried to sell its
          surplus stored primary commodities on the world markets world prices for 
          many goods would be drastically affected to the detriment of countries like 
          Australia. The United States has done a great deal to try and avoid this 
          sort of situation. Where food has been given away it has been given away 
          to those countries which would not have been able to afford to but it on 
          commercial terms. But they also buy enormous quantities of their own 
          agricultural products to give away to needy people in America, to provide 
          free lunches for school children and for this sort of thing. Despite the 
          vast problems created by the surplus of any commodities it has been 
          estimated that the United States or their Department is still sitting on 
          something like 25'h of the United States agricultural capacity. In other 
          words, this is the estimated possible expansion in production that could
          take place.   If it had occurred the problems that are now present would, 
          of course, be increased many times.

                                            2



                     The one American primary industry that does not seem to have 
           shared the general prosperity and general expansion that has taken place
           is the American vool. industry. I have not yet been able to understand 
           or to find out the causes for this but it may be something that is not 
           well understood in America itself. However, despite policies that have 
           been designed to encourage the wool industry expansion has not increased 
          and members of the industry have not prospered to any great extent.

                     I have had some preliminary discussions about the problems 
          of meat, about the problems of the surplus of high quality meat that is 
          produced in the United States and about the meat trade between Australia 
          and the United States. In the next week or two I am hoping to meet some 
          members of Congress from the Republican Party who have been in the fore- 
          front of efforts to oppose or to reduce the imports of meat from 
          Australia. Despite the meat agreement that we have signed with the 
          United States Administration Australia is fortunate that in this year 
          other profitable markets have become available in the United Kingdom, 
          in Italy, in Greece and perhaps in France. This has meant that in this 
          year we will be exporting to the United States a total of about 170,000 
          or perhaps about 180,000 tons. This is very considerably under our 
          entitlement of 242,000 tons under the Agreement that was recently signed. 
•         It is still much less than the amount of meat that was sent to the United 
          States last year, which totalled nearly 260,000 tons. This reduction 
          should strengthen the hand of those who argue in favour of the Agreement 
          that was signed between Australia and the United States. There had been 
          some fear expressed by American cattlement that there was an unlimited 
          capacity to go on expanding, to go on increasing exports of meat from 
          Australia to the United States.

                     While -total Australian production of beef and mutton will 
          continue to expand over a very long period I think there may have been some 
          exaggeration in the United States of the rate and extent of any possible 
          expansion in Australia. This question of trade in meat between Australia 
          and the United States is a most important one for Australia, especially so 
          since the balance of trade between the two countries is quite heavily in
          favour of the United States.   From what I have learned so far I am sure 
          this is recognised in America, and I will be looking forward in the next 
          few days to meeting some of those people from the cetsle growing and 
          fattening areas of this country who have expressed grave concern about 
          the agreement.



                                           o00--

