<!--start metadata-->
Title: Radio communications base in Western Australia
Description: press statement
Date: 26/05/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        PRESS STAIEENT•                                               íuA LC OLM FRASEtt

        N~? Y 26th, 1963



                    RADIO COhhUNICATIOE BASE IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA



                     In this last week, the Parliament has debated the controversial 
        radio base to be established by the U.S.A. at Iearmonth on the north-west 
        cape of Western Australia. This base is goin to add immeasurably to the 
        strength of the free world.


                    Quite frankly, I am very pleased that the United States is
        establishing this base at very considerable cost of herself. It will make 
        the American deterrent more effective, and much as I would like to be able 
        to think otherwise, I am utterly convinced that our own survival depends upon 
        the efficiency of the deterrent power of the Western world.


                    There are some people who have put the view that because the 
       Government members argue wholeheartedly in favour of the base they are there- 
        fore a ;ainst disarmament. This is quite false. There is not a person in 
       Australia who does not earnestly wish to see conventional and nuclear 
       disarmament brought into being. We all know that the only thing preventing
•       this happening is the constant refusal of the Soviet powers to permit any 
       realistic inspection of a disarmament plan. We would be much more than 
       foolish - we,would be committing suicide - if we entered into a disarmament 
       agreement and merely took the Russianfs word that they were carrying out their 
       part of the agreement without some form of international inspection under the 
       auspices of the United Nations. Because the Russians have never agreed to 
       this sort of inspection, disarmament of either conventional or nuclear weapons 
       has become impossible.

                    We have also got to remember that the Russians and the Chinese. 
       have a vast superiority-in conventional arms over the Western countries and 
       therefore Western survival -, the freedom of Western Europe, of Berlin, of 
       Britain. and of Australia depends upon the nuclear deterrent in the possession 
       of the United States and the United Kingdom. Mach as we might deplore the 
       fact that our survival depends upon the possession of such-weapons, we cannot 
       escape the realities of our position.


                     ropoaels have been put forward fora nuclear free zone that would
       include Australia and other parts of the Southern He:isphere.. It is not•
'      possible to sub-divide disarmament in this fashion. If there were a nuclear 
       free zone in this region we would hamstring the operations of the United States 
       Seventh Fleet and of the British Singapore Fleet. We would restrict Western 
       bases which could be used for retaliation against Russia and we would not be 
       affecting a single Communist base because they rely more heavily on inter- 
       continental ballistic mie il.es... We would, therefore, be immediately weaken- 
       ing the Western deterrent without affecting the Communist nuclear capability. 
       Instead of trying to. weaken the Western deterrent_ we should he doing everything 
       we can to strengthen it' and this. is, in part, what the radio base at the north- 
       west Cape will do.,


                    I.t is not always Understood that the polaris submarine is not what
       is called in nuclear terms a first strike weapon. ; first strike weapon is
       one that is so accurate that it can knock out an enemy. missile base and thus
       prevent retaliation against the aggressor. The polaris missile is not
       accurate enough for this.. It is accurate enough to hit a city but not to hit
       a missile base.. The real deterrent lies in the second-strike weapon, of
       which the polaris missile is one example,. because it is the second strike
       weapon possessed by both the United States, the United Kingdom and Russia which
       makes all the great powers shrink back in horror from the reality and possibility
       of nuclear war.•  It is Western ability to destroy cities, centres of population 
       and civilization which prevents Communist powers ever beginning a nuclear war. 
       Because of its manoeuvreability, the polaris cannot be knocked out by a first 
       strike missile attack from Russiar, Therefore, the Russians know that even 
       if they hit American missile bases on the United States mainland, there will 
       be polaris submarines capable of attacking Russian cities and destroying them.


                                                                             /2.

                                       -  2 -

      It is this knowledge possessed by the Russians that prevents them starting a 
      nuclear war.

                Under these c5.rcumstan„es, it is clear that the polaris missile is not 
      an aggressive weapon. It is a weapon that is used in answer to aggression. 
      The aggressor - the first person to use these weapons - has got to have weapons 
      so accurate that they can knock out the opponent's nuclear capability, The 
      polaris is not designed for this purpose.

                Therefore, it is quite clear that if the United States ever got into 
      the position of having to give the order "Fire” it would be in the sort of 
      circumstances under which inter-continental missiles were already on the way to 
      the United States and probably to many countries of Europe. Under these 
      circumstances, the United States leaders would have from 15 to 30 minutes in 
      which to give the order "Fire" before the Russian missiles landed on the United 
      States. This is the kind of emergency in which the all important and fateful 
      message might have to be sent through the radio base in Western Australia. The 
      fact that the radio base is there and that the United States has submarines and 
      second strike nuclear capability makes it much less likely that the order will 
      ever have to be given, but if it did have to be given, speed would be important 
      and there would be no time to consult us or to ask our permission. -

                At Hólyloch in Scotland there is e polaris submarine base - not just a
411   radio base but a polaris submarine base. This, together with the nuclear 
      bombers stationed in Britain and the Thor ballistic missiles based in Britain, 
      places the United Kingdom absolutely in the front line as she has been, indeed,
      almost since the birth of British history. Incidentally,,it is worth recalling 
      that if the United Kingdom had not been in the front line in defence of freedom, 
      especially through this century, Australia would not have survived.

                The Hnlyloch agreement with the United States has never been published 
      by the United Kingdom but the British Prime Ri.nister, Nr. MbR.11an, has answered 
      many questions in the United Kingdom Parliament on the matter. • One paragraph of 
      his is significant, Describing the Holyloch agreement with the U.S.A. Mr. 
      McMillan said - "1 use the words fullest possible consultation because consultation 
      might obviously be impossible in circumstances of a sudden surprise attack on 
      the West. We would indeed not wish to insist on prior consultation in such 
      circumstances, because it is the absolute certainty of retaliation that deters 
      aggression."

                It is worth noting that, under conditions of emergency, the British 
      Prime Ri.nister is prepared to trust the Americans and say - "If you have to give 
      the order 'Fire' we trust you to do it without previous consultation with us"- 
      because eb't'.McMillan has recognised that time, under these circumstances, would 
      be vital and furthermore, it is the absolute certainty of retaliation that deters 
      aggression.

                This attitude is markedly different from that of our own Opposition in 
      this Parliament because these are the vary circumstances in which our opponents 
      want to be able to say to the United States "You must not use this radio base 
      for sending a message to your forces in the Indian Ocean or to forces in the 
      North," Our opponents believe that by doing this, we can stand apart from the 
      East-West struggle. If this were true, their approach may be tenable but we 
      cannot stand apart in this struggle between freedom and suppression. Our survival 
      depends upon the survival of the rest of the free world and therefore we should 
      d+s as much as we possibly can to make tre free world stronger. If we stood 
      aside and if, by some miracle, we were not affected in a world war between the 
      Soviets and the United States, if Russia won we would merely be the prize to be 
      taken by the victor. If Russia did win a war with the United States any country 
      that had stood aside would be overwhelmed and over-run by the Russians or by the 
      Chinese before a year was out.

               There is no safety for -Australia in isolation or in aloofness. The
      only safety lies in co-operation with our `.flies and trust in their integrity. 
     We have that trust,


                                      --0 Oo--

