<!--start metadata-->
Title: Berlin issue
Description: press statement
Date: 24/09/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


             PRhSS STATEMENT

                                                          September 21+th,1961

                    Last week the Parliament spent a full day debating the Berlin 
             issue and the resumption of nuclear tests initiated by the Russians. 
             Towards the close of the debate, the Minister for Trade, Mr. McEwen, 
             spoke. He made an appeal to the Parliament to treat this matter on 
             a non-partisan basis, to try to work towards achieving an Australia- 
             wide foreign policy and attitude in regard to great matters of inter- 
             national importance. There is a precedent for this approach in 
             other countries. For many years, the United Kingdom had a by-partisan 
             non-party foreign policy, and in the United States differences in 
             foreign policy between the Democrats and the Republicans are differences
             of emphasis.  They are not differences of real substance. However,
             this has not always been the case in Australia and I believe that
             this is the great tragedy of Australian politics. On many issues
             the Government has been strongly divided from the Opposition.
                     In this recent debate if you read the Prime Minister's state-
             ments and the speech of Mr. Calwell you might well think that there
•            is no real disagreement - just a difference of emphasis as you will
             often find in the United States. However, even though this might
             be so, if you compare the speeches of the two Leaders, when you
             look at other statements made by Opposition members you find state-
             ments that do not and cannot lie side by side wit1our own policy.
             One prominent member of the Labor Party ended a speech in this way,
             and I quote from Hansard: -Finally, I believe that in the inter-
             national sense Australia must be a partner with the uncommitted
             nations of the world. They need us in their fight for world peace
             and sanity, and we need them. By creating this great moral un-
             committed force throughout the world we may have some influence on
             the hot-blooded men who, for their own personal, nationalistic and
             racial reasons want to plunge the world into its Armageddon."
•                    If this were Australian policy it would mean that we would
             stand aside in the great struggle in other parts of the world -
             that we would not make our contribution in fighting for freedom.
             As much as everyone loathes and hates war and the suffering that
             goes with it, I cannot believe that the majority of Australians
             would want us to stand aside while other people are fighting for
             their freedom as well as for our own but this would be the implication
             of this proposal.
                      Another member, speaking in somewhat the same terms, said:
             "The rights and wrongs of the position as the honorable member for
             Mackellar sees it are open to debate. We do not propose to debate 
             them. We are not on either side. We are for humanity itself."
                       This, again, is an extraordinary statement. You cannot 
             be for humanity without choosing your side because, in the world 
             struggle at the present time, the basic difference between the East 
             and the West is whether you are prepared to fight for the rights 
             of the individual and democracy as we know it, or whether you are 
             prepared to forget about individual freedom and acquiesce in the

                                          2   -

           establishment of one Party States right round the world. It is true 
           that the Russians and other communist countries have their elections, 
           but there is always only'one name on the ballot ticket and anyone who 
           does not put a tick opposite the name is quietly taken away as they
           leave the poll box.  Under these circumstances it is quite clear that 
           there is no difficulty for the Communists in getting 99% support at 
           the elections.
                    The same member, a little later in his speech, equated 
           President Kennedy with Mr. Krushchev, implying that one as much as the 
           other was the cause of tension and that one as much as the other was 
           working for peace. A little further on he accused Government members 
           of using legalities and similar arguments to buttress a weak case. 
           If there is to be international peace surely it should be based on
           legal relationships between States. After all, what else is peace 
           inside one country based on? Maintenance of the rule of law. If this 
           goes there is no peace and no order.
                     Another member in his speech, and I quote again from Hansard,
•          said: .xI have been a pacifist.  I am still a pacifist      I have 
           an inner conviction on this matter, and my line is clear and I shall 
           pursue it." I think all of us would term a pacifist a person who was 
           generally opposed to war of any kind, but this particular person is a 
           pacifist with a strange slant because after having said he was a 
           pacifist he then went on to condemn nearly everything that has been 
           done by Western countries, accused one of the Western leaders of 
           unashamedly wanting war but offered not a word of criticism of the 
           Communist countries or of Russia. That is a kind of pacificism that 
           many of us find it difficult to understand.
                       I have used these statements in Hansard to show why it is 
           difficult to obtain a genuine bi-partisan foreign policy in Australia. 
•          Even though Mr. Calwell"s speech could be taken to support the same 
           view as that of the Prime Minister there is a strong element in the 
           Opposition that disagrees with this. It is an element that has a 
           considerable voice in framing policies. For a long time I have tried 
           to understand why there are good Australians who find more pleasure in 
           looking out our own faults than in recognising the Russians and the
           Communists for what they are.  Of course we are not perfect and the 
           whole purpose of Government is to create better conditions for people
           inside a country.  That is our objective, and the objective I think,
           of all Western countries.  In Western countries and in former colonies 
           the trend is towards freedom, independence, equality and justice.
                       It may be that anything that runs against this general 
           pattern in Western countries so offends and disturbs our own emotions
           and sensitivities that it strikes us as being much more important than
           crimes committed by Soviet countries. If this is so we should not
           let it cloud our judgment in international debate. The Western world 
           and democracies have, for a long time, fought for freedom. The
           trend has been towards freedom.  In the Soviet countries there is no
           pretence of freedom and the trend is against it. Once proud countries
           of Eastern Europe with quite a tradition of democracy behind them

                    3
     have no freedom because of Communist occupation and because of the 
     installation of Communist puppets.
          Perhaps you can understand better than I can why there are 
     some people in Australia who, despite all this, seem to take pleasure 
     in criticising the West or the friends of the West and in exonerating 
     the actions of the Soviet Union.










•











•

