<!--start metadata-->
Title: Postal charges
Description: press statement
Date: 3/09/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT         September 3ró,1959
MALCOLM FRASERPOSTAL CHARGES
         The Government agreed to further eleventh hour 
reductions in the proposed postage rates. The bulk rate has been
 creased from 5d. for each 8 oz. or part thereof to 5d. for each 
12 oz. or part of 12 ozs. Furthermore, the rates on British books 
has now been reduced from the proposed 5d. for 2 ozs and 3d. for 
each additional ounce to 5d. for the first 4 ozs. and 3d. for each 
additional 4 ozs.
          This reduction has taken away the worst 
anomalies in the Postmaster—General's proposals. In particular,, I 
hope the burden on the country newspapers will not be too onerous.
          I would further like to draw your attention to
the following facts.
          The cost of handling the average newspaper or 
periodical posted in bulk is more than 6d. and the average revenue 
derived from this l-d. Thus, each individually addressed country 
newspaper is subsidised by nearly 5d. This subsidy will be reduced 
by 10A to about 4d. under the proposed rates. The loss to the 
Department in handling this class of mail would be (Ca to £3 million 
annually.
          The proposal which has been introduced in the 
Bill increases the bulk rate by one—third. It is a much smaller 
proportionate increase than the two previous adjustments made in 
July, 1949 and July, 1950. If a local newspaper weighed loz. the 
cost of postage under bulk would be 5/12ths of a penny only.
The proposed bulk rates for Australia are cheap compared with charges 
applicable in other countries. In the United Kingdom no single 
addressed publication is carried for less than 2d. stg. A United 
Kingdom publisher distributing 1,000 separately addressed papers, 
each weighing 1 oz., would pay postage equivalent to Z10. 8. 4. 
At the new bulk rates in Australia the publisher here would pay
E,1. 4. 9.

           .. 2 IMP

       Further, taking into account the changes in the 
purchasing power of money, nearly all the proposed rates are 
relatively lower than before the war. The ld. postage of
 it Roland Hill's day was a poor service when considered in 
relation to its purchasing power, its present day equivalent 
would be 1/— compared with the proposed rates of 5d.
       If the Post Office charges had risen in the 
same rate as the basic wage since 1949 the letter rate would 
be 7d. instead of 5d. as proposed, and a trunk call between 
Melbourne and Perth 42/3d. instead of the 15/— proposed.
       These figures indicate the Department has,
over the years, maintained its general. efficiency.

