<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian economy
Description: press statement
Date: 2/04/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                              April 2nd, 1961


                                         ~ ECGN
                             is the first of three presa eta te is on the Australian


                As soon as Parliament re-assembled, the feeder of the Opposition moved 
a censure notion on the Government concerning the Government's finanoial financialpolioioa. 
It was inevitable that ir. tletlell would do this, And Opposition Leader would,
a time such as the present, launch a oensure motion against the Government,  The 
Opposition would do this if for no other region than that the Government at the time
    unpopular and the Opposition would try to make the Government more unpopular by 
giving unfavourable policy items publicity through the debate,
                However, the success or not of the censure motion depends upon the 
defence l e Government can sake of its policies and upon the alternatives that the 
Opposition has to offer. Hr. ca well, ae I understand his speech, has only one 
alternative, and that is to re-iepoee *port licenaing. Be seemed to argue - and 
other Members of the Apposition argued similarly .. that this would solve all Australia's 
problems. Of course, the solution is not as simple as this.
                The layperson never finds it particularly easy to grasp the wi 
wherefores of eooncmio mesaureta, but he certainly feels the effecte of them, and 
the effect is had the Government is, of course, unpopular. In this regard, I only
want to say that     Government that tries to curb a boom must be unpopular if it is 
doing the job properly.
                In a boom time, a nation is spending be   its, as Aus 
was, internally and externally. Nobody likes having their imome rid..
in effect, what the GoveriEent has done by introducing usures designed to balance 
the economy both internally and externally.
                Conversely, if there is some recession in the economy axad th€a slack 
needs taking up, the Government finds it easy to introduce policies that are popular. 
If there are res ureee unemployed, they can be stimulated, reductions in tax of one
kind or another.    Under those aircumstanoee, the Government would naturally be popular. 
                So much for generalitios.
                The present economic situation is complex, but it can be t nderstood 
and should be. It is my job, as a supporter of what the Government has done, to 
explain it and then you, yourselves, can judge whether the Government is right or no

                           sto begins Ab ,tt 14              ;E,q. At
Government was beo                 ingly concerned about inflation.       The wage
decisions of the previous        ve months had added t15Cm a year to the purcYaneing 
power of the wage earner.            iricreacvd purchasing pover was not, at the time, 
matched hjr increased produ              It vasi bound to give stimulus to inflation.
At the same time, the Goverment saes greatly disturbed by the positioon of expartixe
industri~i is, particularly rura1.       ries.     Maw rural indue tries vere at that 
time, and are now in difficulties caused mainly ty falling prices overseas over 
which this Government, or any Australian Government, has no control. Further, 
inflation caused largely hy the pressures of development inside Austre.lia had been 
a oontributi*ag factor.
                       Even                     discount this because inflation in other
countries since 1,953 has            pretty well hand in bane with inflation in Australia.
     ver, it was clear that so inflation in this country would take the exporting 
    ustriea ' position worse.
                       Last February 12 months, the Government announced four m cures
          to help curb inflation at                   The first of these was wage policy 
under which the Government argued in the Arbitration Court that there ehou]4 not than 
be a further inc r e in the basic wage, having regard to recent decisions that had
added £15044 to the wages bill.          The Government argued — and I believe rightly •. 
that higher wages at that time Baia is do nothing to raise the stem rd of life of 
the wage earner. It would increase his money wages but not his real wages in 
terms of goods because the increase would not have been matched by an increasing 
productivity and prices would have been forced up.
                       The Government Enter announced that the Reserve Batik had 
             the Trading Bunks to inorea o their advances to the public only moderately. 
It wanted a policy of credit restraint at that time,
                       The Government also announced that when it introduced its 
Atidget in August it would budget for a surplus which represents an attack an inflation 
as opposed to a deficit Budget. ari fly, under a surplus Budget, a Government 
collects more revenues than it spends, wzieh is the proper thing to do in a time of 
inflation. Under a deficit Budget, the Government spends more than it taxes in 
any one year, which is the correct thing to do when the econopy needs some stimulus. 
Deficits should be financed out of the surpluses that have been created in times 
of inflation. You will remember that the Government carried out this p

                                          3

      w?aen the Gadget was actually introduced.
                    The fourth item of policy announced February twelve months ago
          the lii p ing of import licensing. The Government argued that Australian 
      industries had, for too long, been protected not only by the traditional tariff
      but also by licensing.         Because of this double protection, may industries 
      have been able to put up prices where they need not have done so, and would not 
      havebawl. done so if there had been some external competition. This was an important
      element in the fight against inflation.    The Government felt it was in a
      sound position in lifting licensing.   Fourteen months ago, our overseas
      reserves were particularly ctrong.      had been built up for the very day when 
      licensing could be abolished.
                         Theme measures would have en effective in restraining 
         lation ail bringing internal and external balance into the economy if it were 
      not for two matters that appeared after the Budget we introduced in August. 
                          A later report will deal with the Governmentss November
      mtQasure.



~

