<!--start metadata-->
Title: Indonesia and Malaysia
Description: press statement
Date: 25/09/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   •





                 PRESS STATEMENT ISSUED BY
                 MALCOLM FRASER, M.P. FOR WANNON.


            In the last two or three years, Australian policy towards 
    Indonesia has tried to take into account the fact that the Indonesians 
    were subjected to Dutch rule for 350 years and the fact that the 
    Indonesians, to some degree, legitimately felt that they had been 
    tricked by the Dutch over what is now West Irian. It was hoped 
    that once their revolution in terms of obtaining possession of all 
    the former Dutch colonies in the area was complete, the Indonesians 
    would settle down and manage their own affairs„ However, this has 
    proved to be a vain hope and we must now look at the present situa- 
    tion and discount past history,
            Colonial rule, lack of training and suspicion can be 
    allowed to excuse certain things but there becomes a time when
 •  independent nations if they wish to remain so, must say: "This far 
    and no tattamwq
            Tunku Abdul Rahman has done everything that can be expected 
    to quiet Indonesian fears of the proposed Malaysia. He has pointed
    out t _the economic reasons for the Federation; he attended a 
    Summit meeting at Djakarta and became a party to what may become 
    the infamous Maphilinda Declaration. He postponed the forming of 
    the new Federation for 16 days so that a team of United Nations 
    experts could visit the territories to assess whether the peoples 
    of these territories wished to become part of Malaysia. This was 
    at the express request of Indonesia,
           The Tunku, Australia and the United Kingdom had never had
11!; any doubt about their wish because elections had recently been held
    in these territories which overwhelmingly supported the Federation.
           However, the Tunku agreed to the United Nations assessment 
    which confirmed the opinions already held and reported there was an 
    overwhelming majority in favour of Federation.
           Thus, the Federation was announced and celebrated on the 
    16th September,
           Indonesia, however, has indicated that she is not prepared 
    to accept the assessment of the United Nations survey team, and since 
    the formation of the Federation we have seen evidence that Indonesia 
    will continue her policy of confrontation. There are raids and 
    Terrorist activities in Sarawak and North Borneo which the British 
    any have been proved to have been sponsored by Indonesia.
           There have been riots in Djakarta in which the British 
    Embassy was burnt a few hours after the British Ambassador had asked 
   unsuccessfully for additional police protection,

                                                                                                                                                                                 -2-
                                                                     Now we have seen the height Of all absurdities - a decision 
                  by the Indonesian President that trade relations between Malaysia 
                  and Indonesia will be cut. This may well damage Malaysia to some 
                  extent, but, in general, Malaysia has a strong economy with a healthy 
                  overseas balance of trade. Sanctions imposed by Indonesia against 
                  Malaysia will hurt Indonesia much more than they will hurt Malaysia.
                                                                     The time has come when the nations in this region can no 
                  longer afford to take into account Indonesia's unhappy past history. 
                  This large and populous country, in many ways rich in resources, 
                  cannot be allowed to unsettle South East Asia indefinitely.
                                                                     The United Kingdom Government has given Malaysia an
                  unequivocal guarantee that the United Kingdom will supply whatever 
                  defence Malaysia needs, and our previous defence commitments,to
                  Malaya will be extended to cover Malaysia. As is well-known, we will
•                 stand behind the Commonwealth countries in any future crisis that
                  may arise. Malaysia is a member of the Commonwealth.
                                                                     We should not be provocative or bombastic but we must make
                  it quite clearly known that we will not tolerate the sort of behaviour
                  we have recently seen.
                                                                     Indonesia as she stands now has not the resources to be a
                  direct military threat in this region unless she is backed by Russia
                  or China. This is because her industries are almost non-existent
                  and she could not support a modern army in the field for more than
                  a few weeks. Therefore Indonesia alone could not be a direct military
                  threat. With assistance, or in ten or twelve years' time, the story
                  may be different..
                                                                     However, the sort of circumstances to which she is driving
                  herself may cause so much economic unrest and disquiet that a military
                  or Communist takeover in Indonesia may become inevitable.
                                                                     A Communist Indonesia, with the ruthlessness that Communism
                  affords might well produce the industrial capacity to enable.
                  Indonesia in its own right to be a military threat. However, this
                  is for the future and the future is impossible to predict.
                                                                     A more likely course of events will be Indonesian action
                  hostile to Malaysia, with border conflicts between the Indonesian
                  and Malaysian borders in the Borneo Territories.
                                                                     There will be difficult days ahead for Malaysia, Australia
                  and the United Kingdom. It will be the urgent task of all three
                  Governments to restrain Indonesia with firmness and with complete
                  resolve, but, if possible, witho                                                                                                                                                        riving her to Communism.
                                                                     Now is the time to                                                                                                    e ndonesia so that she will under-
                  stand that interference in the affairs of her neighbour will not be 
                  tolerated or allowed.
                  CANBERRA A.C.T.25th                                                                             1963.,

