<!--start metadata-->
Title: Trade with under-developed countries, Commonwealth assistance - education, Australian development
Description: press statement
Date: 6/06/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEPENT ;

rALCOLM FRASER s

                                                   June 6th, 1965


                This will be my last talk in this series because 
Parliament rose last week.

                A number of matters were mentioned in debate in the 
Parliament however which I have not had time to report.

TRADE WITH UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES

                One of these concerns trade with under-developed 
countries. Australia has taken the lead of all countries in the world 
in offering concessions to a long list of under-developed countries which 
will enable their exports to enter Australia at preferential rates of
tariff.  Over one hundred countries are involved in this list.

                The Government has taken this course because it 
recognises that aid alone is not enough if the under--developed countries 
are to raise their own standards and to provide ea proper life for their 
own people. Aid must be followed with appropriate opportunities for 
trade. Most countries cf the world want to pay their own way. they
don't want to live on somebody else's charity, Under-developed countries 
would become resentful if the industrial countries offered aid of one kind 
or another and at the same time maintained barriers that made mutual trade 
impossible.

                Australia has long argued that this kind of thing should 
be adopted in the forum of the general agreement of trade and tariffs. 
What we have done will, in fact, confront the G.A.T.T. with considerable 
difficulties because up to the present time the industrial nations in this 
Organization have set their faces against any new preferences in trading
arrangements.  Therefore, unless G.A.T.T. agrees to these new preferences 
offered by Australia it would be in contravention of this trade treaty 
to put them into effect. However, it may well be extremely difficult 
for G.A.T.T. to oppose these new preferences since their purposes is 
plainly to assist less developed countries to pay their own way in the 
world by offering them some more opportunity to trade with us. Indeed, 
it is our hope that many other countries in the General Agreement of 
Trade and Tariffs will accept this precedent and not cf.iy endorse these 
new preferences but also introduce preferences of their own designed 
to the same end.





                                                               /2

              - 2 -


COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE FOR EDUCATION

        Shortly before the Parliament adjourned for the recess 
the Prime Minister introduced two Bills that will continue for the next 
three financial years the Commonwealth grants for educational purposes 
that were introduced as a result of the last election policy.

        The first of these Bills Continues for a further three 
years annual grants of £5M, to the States for technical colleges and schools. 
These grants will operate in an area where independent schools do not exist 
and will therefore be confined to State institutions, They are intended to 
assist the training of young people in trade schools and technical colleges. 
Experience in the first year of the program has indicated that it fills an 
important place in the Australian education scene, and the Government has 
therefore introduced legislation to continue these grants on the same basis 
as for the first year for the next three years.

        The second of these Bills is to continue for the next.. three 
financial years grants to secondary schools for the construction and equip- 
ment of science laboratories. Operation of the scheme in the first year 
has been successful; State Governments have been paid over £32M. in the 
first year and this has resulted in the States being able to provide science 
laboratories and equipment in 293 more secondary schools than would other- 
wise have been possible. Victoria has taken the lead in providing addition- 
al facilities in 167 schools, £1,334,000 was provide.? in the first year 
for independent schools, most of which has already been paid to such schools. 
189 independent schools will have been assisted, 120 of these will have 
grants for laboratories and equipment while the remainder will have grants 
for equipment only. At the present moment 708 independent schools are 
registered as being interested in receiving assistance.

        The provision of a three-year program, making the same 
amount of money available in each year will help the schools plan their 
building program with the knowledge of the amount of assistance they will 
receive and when they will receive it. The funds will be divided in each 
of these three years as they have been divided in the past. The first year 
of both these schemes has demonstrated their worth to the general community. 
It should not be forgotten however that there is an over-riding general 
objective that we are pursuing with both these forms of assistance. A 
modern industrial nation requires an ever increasing number of technicians, 
technologists and scientists. The Commonwealth policy is designed to assist 
in the better training pf such people. There has also been some suggestion 
in the past that science under-graduates in the Universities have not been 
able to take full advantage of scientific facilities available at Universities 
because of inadequate scientific training at secondary schools. Thus, it is 
hoped by these policies to up-grade and assist the quality of education in 
both these fields.

                              /3

                             w ~n


AUSTRALIAN DEVELOP?VENT :


              The Minister for National Development recently published 
a volume listing 339 development projects in Australia under construction, 
having an estimated completion value of £880M. Over the preceding two 
years 228 projects were completed at a cost of £223M. These figures do 
not include projects in the Snowy Mountains Hydro Electric Authority 
whose expenditure up to last year has totalled £240M.

             It may be interesting to divide up some of these projects 
into their different types. There are 72 developmental projects 
concerning water conservation, supply and irrigation - to a total of 
£232M.; 68 programs concerning electricity transmission to a total cost 
of £306M; 20 railway projects costing £125M; 87 bridges costing more than 
a quarter of a million each to a total cost of £93M; 58 Port and Harbour 
projects will cost £77M. These are just some of the major items that 
are under construction at the present time. The values mentioned will 
be the values on the completion of the projects.

             Australians are investing heavily in the future of their 
country so that we can produce more, grow more and support a larger
number of people. In the long term this kind of development provides by 
far the best security for our future independence.

             This is one of the things that highlights the present 
trip to Europe of the Minister for Immigration, Mr. Opperman. We have 
been extraordinarily successful in attracting migrants to this country, 
people who are needed to assist us in the development cf Australia to make 
it the kind of country we hope and believe it will one day be. Mr. 
Opperman's visit will play an important part in seeing that our migrant 
program continues satisfactorily.



                               oOo--M___

