<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam, Labor Party
Description: Radio talk
Date: 30/08/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK
     By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon a . inister for Defence3~1

          On Tuesday in Federal Parliament the Labor Party moved urgently to have 
the House discuss its view that there should be immediate withdrawal of our troops 
from Vietnam, and sought-as the Labor Party put it-"international action to end 
hostilities and undertake rehabilitation in Indo-China."
          That debate was interesting, for it showed up the ALP's policy of 
withdrawal, of desertion of our,F,-aÌlies at a time when demonstrable progress has 
been made in Vietnam a a o Labor's desire that we should turn our backs on the
South-East Asi    egion and i *late ourselves on our own soil.
          In the debate I pointed out that to withdraw completely from the region 
would not add to Australian security, but would do a great deal to harm it; damage 
it over a period. Our objective in Vietnam is the same as it always was - to 
establish the circumstances in which the people of South Vietnam can work out 
their own future without interference, without aggression and without fear.
          I considered it of the utmost importance that I should point out to the 
House the sort of progress that has been going on in Vietnam. There has been 
military, political and economic progress. The one million men in the South 
Vietnamese forces have been improving their capabilities and accepting additional 
obligations, especially in the last 18 months. Elections were held throughout 
the country in conditions of turmoil. At the end of last year there were over 
2,000 villages and nearly 10,000 hamlets which had elected administrations and 
only 90 villages and 330 hamlets which had(appointed administrations. Elected 
governments have been established at the national level. Rice production has 
been rising and imports this year are likely to be half what they were last year.
          The United States has announced a phased withdrawal programme. From 
a peak of 550,000 troops in November 1968, the U.S. Government has at the moment 
over 400,000 troops of all services in Vietnam and these, according to 
announcements, will reduce to something like 260,000 during the middle part of 
next year. This, however, is still a strong commitment to help preserve and 
maintain the integrity of South Vietnam. The Australian Government has
announced the withdrawal of a battalion - the 8th - and some supporting troops, 
and these will be home in Australia in November.
          But to help the South Vietnamese undertake the additional military 
obligations in Phuoc Tuy Province, we are establishing mobile advisory training 
teams - probably 15 altogether - to assist the regional force and popular force 
companies. Already five teams are operating, and initial reports indicate that 
this new programme is being successful. The jungle warfare training school 
which we are helping to establish with the South Vietnamese will ultimately train 
about 500 junior leaders at any one time.

                                                                                             2.



                             I pose the question - why does the Labor Party want to withdraw from 

        Vietnam immediately? Was it, I asked, because that Party was tired? Was it 

        because it was merely looking for votes in Australia, knowing that everyone 

        would prefer to have troops here if this were the responsible and proper 

        course to undertake? Did the Party believe that South Vietnam was not worthy 

        of protection? Did it consider it a civil war? On this last point, it is 

        pertinent to ask if North Korea now attacked South Korea, would the Labor Party 

        say it was just a civil war? I would have thought that what has happened in 

        Cambodia has revealed North Vietnamese aggression even to the most blind. 

        While he may not be one of the most blind, the Cambodian situation certainly 

        revealed North Vietnamese aggression to the Labor Party Victorian member, 

        Mr. Gordon Bryant, whose recent denunciation of that.blatant aggression came as 

        a shock to his political colleagues.

                             I went on to show how, in the face of 41 international efforts to bring 

        peace to Vietnam, it was the North Vietnamese negotiators or those of the National 

        Liberation Front who had opposed or obstructed these bids for peace. At home
        we had the sorry spectacle of Victoria's Dr. Cairns                                                         -   a possible Minister for

        External Affairs in a Labor Government - who pought                                                         to bri9ng to Australia 
                                                                                                                              favk.•, a
        representatives of the National Liberation Frontso                                                          that they could publicise

      (-their cause in a future Moratorium. What would the                                                          parents and relatives of

        Australian troops think of a political leader in this country asking the 

        spokesmen of the very people against whom our troops are fighting to come to 

        Australia and put their case?

                             If the Australian Labor Party wants the North Vietnamese to win in 

        Vietnam, they should stand up and say so, as their colleague in the Senate, 

        Senator Wheeldon, had stated so clearly. In short, withdrawal of our troops, 

        as the Labor Party has proposed, would involve repudiation of our allies on
        both sides of the Pacific. And                                     there-are- othe3- allies -in (Ale                             South     -East Asian

        region, and if we fail to live                                                                                             his is somethi-ng-
        that we will never live dow .A~after all0 the years of struggle on                                                                                      part             s~,~~

tit     and the shorter period of support from her al.lies,it would be tragic now if&A T
        our own stamina and fortitude gave up 4ec_.) ve2a,.e getting into-th-e last

        stretch of-the Vietnam confIdT17. At.laant, that is he-h©pe...that is he 

        belief .. ;and that-is-what-we-are working fo- -•-

                             Isolation!

       -1.i-ke-..'is the pnly logical,00nclu ion, that comes from the Labor Party's policy. 

        It is withdrawal,±rróm Singapore and Malaysia. The Leader of the Opposition, 

        Mr. Whitlam spent his time in the area on a recent visit lecturing the Malaysians 

        and Singaporeans on what they should be doing at the very time when the British 

        defence minister was in those two countries beginning to work out the terms and

                                                 3.



conditions in whi„çh there would be a continuing British military presence in 

those countries. I made the point in the Parliamentary debate that the 

Opposition sometimes spoke as if they were the only advocates of peace. But 

there is not a person in the Parliament who does not want peace in this 

region and security in South East Asia. But we want a peace which does not 

deny what decent men stand for. And, I continued, the Opposition's policies 

would I believe make that denial.

             The Deputy Prime Minister and leader of the Country Party, Mr. John 

McEwen entered the debate. He spoke following a Labor member, Mr. Morrison, 

who had summed up his remarks with the words that it was past time for the 

withdrawal of all Australian forces. Mr. McEwen talked about how our whole 

democratic system of government was based on the fact that although there were 

differences of opinion within a community, free elections were held, a 

government was elected by the majority and the laws that the Parliament passes 

prevail. But now the left wing of the unions with their leader Mr. Hawke and 

the left—wing dominated ALP with Mr. Whitlam as its voice all combined by

demonstrations, strikes and threats of strike, to defy elected government and
                                                                       MA/Oct—wen.
defy the laws of Parliament. An attempt was being made,-imAsaid, to undermine

the will of the people to continue resistance to Communist aggression. He 

said he thought there were moves, desperate efforts, to embarrass the 

Government and to give effect to the urgent ambition of some who, for the
passing advantage of destroying a Government and changing(sides in the Houseo

were willing to pay the price of sacrificing all respect for Australian

democracy.

             Men in our community had, through turmoil and tears, built our

reputation as a staunch and reliable ally, Mr. McEwen said. The proposal

Labor put before the House would be an act of shame in the eyes of the United

States, South Vietnam, South Korea, New Zealand and others.

             He went on and I quote — "Who in the world wishes to destroy the

treaty with the United States? I am not accusing the Labor Party of wishing

to destroy it. Who but the Communists wish to destroy it? I am saying that there

are many who are unwittingly acting as tools of the Communists. The Communists

wish to destroy our alliance with the United States and to end the trust in which

we are held in South East Asia ..."

             Mr. McEwen said with one stroke Labor's proposal would make Australia

a shameful object of derision internationally. Most important, it would draw

the attention of the world to the fact that Australia, by its own choice, alone

in a lonely part of the world, had thrown away its alliances. Could we turn

to another ally? Where was there another powerful ally in the world to whom we

could turn? Labor, influenced by ambition and by sinister leftist forces, would

leave Australia friendless(internationally, Mr. McEwen said. It would put a

                                   P7

                                 4.

label on this country — "I am a lonely remote, rich, helpless country; come
and take me." Labor's policy, the Deputy Prime Minister emphasised, was to 
destroy the authority of Parliament at home and to spurn alliance; abroad. There 
had never been a more tragic policy in the national interests of Australia and 
her survival than the policy that Labor was propounding today.

