<!--start metadata-->
Title: Primary industry
Description: press statement
Date: 5/05/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                         s-                (t


                         pRE SS STATEMENT.


          Last week I made representations to the Minister for 
   Primary Industry concerning low interest loans for a certain class 
   of primary producer. My representations followed ek-4<eting of
   the Victorian Wheat and Wool Association at Dr oug.

          My approach to the Minister was made in the vein that there 
   is one branch or class of primary producer that has not benefited 
   from Commonwealth policies and unless some new procedure or a new 
   policy is initiated they will not benefit. I am not referring to 
   people on developed land who have certainly benefited most greatly
el in veee4ein depreciation allowances over the past years or to people 
   who have gone broke on derelict farms through bad management, but 
   I am referring to the only true pioneer in its traditional sense 
   left among our primary producers. That is the man with little 
   capital who gets hold of a scrub block of one kind or another that 
   requires quite an amount of clearing before it can be brought into 
   production. He finds with the increased costs of clearing — of 
   bull dozers anything from £7 to £10 an hour — that he just cannot 
   afford to clear his block and get it into production. He cannot 
   get the benefit of special depreciation allowances because he has 
   not sufficient income against which he can offset these allowances. 
   Very often he has to go, instead of working on his block, to work 
   for wages for come other peroon.

          The type of person who will tackle difficult country
   without a great deal of capital behind him is, I believe, worthy 
   of assistance. He must be courageous. He must be prepared to 
   work hard and long or he would never take the job on. The banks 
   have never lent money to such people because there is no security. 
   The security is 911 potentiel value in the future. I certainly 
   don't blame the banks for this. They must work on sound and 
   established principles and they must protect their shareholders' 
   capital and their depositors' interosts. But, just because it is 
   not a sound banking proposition it does Lot moan that the
   Government should not take n mall sick involved in helping these 
   people. Thee is plenty of security in the potential value and 
   in the potential production of the land.

          I keow of many such people in my own electorate and I am 
   quite sure there are many throughout Australia struggling on land 
   that could be highly productive. There are thousands of acres 
   of this kind of land that could be developed by these people in 
   the hinterlend of Portland. It is country that will eventually 
   produce 3 or 4 or more sheep to the acre if the capital can be 
   made available to develop it.

          I also believe at the present time that it will be 
   particularly opportune to seek ways and means of granting assistance 
   to these remaining pioneers. Revenues must be buoyant frout high 
   wool prices, and if the Government really wishes to achieve greater 
   exports in a known and sure manner, then development of further 
   land by certain specified forms of assistance is the surest way 
   to achieve it.

          It is not my purpose here to try and set out the forms of 
   assistance that could or should he made available but to try and 
   state reasons for acceptance of the principle. Nevertheless, 
   I believe that an Agricultural Development Agency should be 
    established. It should be guided in local areas by local committees. 
   Low interest loans based on potential values rather than on present 
   value should be available. In some areas specific development 
   grants may be necessary in view of high costs of production.

               (r\                       ^-.)-'






    This form of help with certain safeguards has been used for many 
    years in England.

           -2-


   If any justification of such a plan were needed, the fact 
that further agricultural development should afford the best 
and surest way of increasing exports should convince the most 
sceptical.

   A new look at our agricultural policies that would impress 
this class of producer who has so far failed to receive assistance 
would be a great thing for Australia and it would be one of the 
most positive means of earning several more millions of pounds of 
overseas credits.

   Such a policy would be quite a departure from previous 
practice. It will mean that money would be available on the 
future value of land to suitable farmers where, in the past, 
money hes only been lent on present value.

   It is my belief that this change could mean a great 
thing for Australia and for many farmers who have hitherto 
struggled because of leek of finance. But the possibility of 
getting it accepted and put into practice depends, I believe, 
on three things -- the number of people concerned; the number 
of acres concerned throughout Australia and the potential 
increase in production which would come from this land being 
more fully developed and the potential additional overseas income 
it would earn, say, from the exportof mpre primary protì ce*

   I know the \rictorien Beat and ÿ 000l growers are already 
working on this aspect but if there are other producer organisa- 
tions which bevo opinions or facts that could be brought to bear 
on this problem, I should be most grateful if they would get 
in touch with me.

