<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1961 Budget
Description: press statement
Date: 3/09/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PR1 SS STATEMENT

                                                           September 3rd,1961

                       During last week, the general debate on the Budget was 
              continued. The Budget is never an easy document to frame for the 
              simple reason that so many things are unknown. For example, in 
              Australia, we don't know the price we are going to get for our wool 
              and for many other primary commodities, and the prices we get for 
              these things determines our overseas income for the year, and the 
              size of our overseas income is one of the most important factors in
              framing the Budget.  However, as you can see, this is based upon 
              estimates of what we believe prices are going to be and changes in 
              world trading conditions can easily prove this wrong.
                       There is another factor which is just as much unknown and 
              that is how are people going to react? You might think that your 
              own reactions to the Budget are not particularly important. You 
              say: "What influence can I, with my own household expenditure, 
              have on the economic state of the nation?" As an individual, of 
              course, you cannot have any influence, but when you get a great 
•             number of individuals all acting in the same way then the influence 
              can be very great and this is an important element in framing a 
              Budget.
                        For the last few months, going on the level of retail 
              sales, people have not been buying as much as they have been over 
              the average of the last two or three years. Many people have cut 
              their expense where they could. Some have done it because they have 
              not been as confident of the future as they have been, and have felt 
              that perhaps they had better save to some extent in case of a rainy 
              day. This reduced expenditure on behalf of individuals, when it 
              is carried out by a large section of the community, has a very great
              effect and I can shown this by an example. If you decide to
              economise and say you will buy one less packet of cigarettes a week, 
•             this does not have much effect on the manufacturers of tobacco, 
              but if one million smokers in Australia all bought one packet less 
              each week that would have a very great effect on the manufacturers 
              of tobacco in Australia who would be forced to reduce their output 
              and consequently their employment. This shows how individual 
              decisions can affect employment in the community to quite a great 
              extent.
                        This was why the Prime Minister some time ago and again 
              during the Budget debate asked people to go about their business 
              normally. Now, this statement was questioned. People have said if 
              a man is out of work, how can he go about his business normally 
              and this, of course, is quite true, but the very great majority of 
              Australians are in work without any possibility of not being in 
              work and it is these people to whom the Prime Minister was 
              addressing his remarks. The Government has given the lead in 
              the direction it intended by the reduction in sales tax on all 
              household goods because these are industries that have been affected 
              in recent months by reduced sales, and if sales can be increased 
              there will be a demand for increased employment in these industries.

                                             2


                           If the Government thought that the spending pattern of 
              the last few months was going to remain as a permanent feature of 
              the economy, it is my belief that the deficit in the Budget would 
              have been, to some extent, larger, but this was not the opinion of
              the Government, and I think the Government is correct. Over the 
              next few months I think we are much more likely to see a return 
              to the spending pattern of last year and the year before, and if this 
              is so, a great number of people will be spending a little more 
              instead of saving a little more. It was pointed out during the 
              debate that a aA, increase in sales which, after all, is not a very 
              great increase, would be enough to make a large difference in the 
              demand for employment in these consumer industries.
                            I am saying this to try and drive home to individuals
              that each personal decision has an effect and an important effect 
              on the level of activity in the economy, because there are millions 
              of other people all making decisions, and when you get a movement 
              amongst a lot of people in one direction it makes a big difference 
•             to economic activity.
                            The Government believes that, following a moderate 
              stimulus given in the Budget and following a full return to 
              confidence, spending will return to the pattern of previous years. 
              That was the reason for caution shown in the Budget in not making
              the deficit larger.   We do not want to recreate an inflationary 
              boom such as was present last year by giving too great astimulus 
              at the present time.
                             Mr. Calwell did not agree with the view that the 
              Government took and he said that if he won the elections at the 
              end of this year that in February he would budget for£LOOM. deficit. 
              Although Mr. Calwell only mentioned £100M., when you work it out 
•             this deficit would, in fact, be equivalent to a.:300M. If he did 
              win and introduced this supplementary Budget in February, it could 
              not possibly be effective before March and it would therefore 
              operate for March, April, May and June. That is one-third of the 
              financial year. .;100M. for one-third of the financial year is
              equivalent to a300M. for the full year.  I think we could ask 
              ourselves with some doubt as to what contribution this would 
              make towards stability in the economy.

