<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence purchases boost capacity
Description: For press
Date: 6/05/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK
      By Malcolm Fraser, M.P., Minister for Defence
        and Member for Wannon
     At this moment United States and South Vietnamese forces are engaged 
in military operations in Cambodia. From the news coming out of that area you 
will know of the offensives against the base camps, training sites and other 
installations of the North Vietnamese military sanctuaries along the Cambodian 
frontier with South Vietnam.
     I want tonight to devote my talk largely to the address given by 
President Nixon on April 30 in which he spelled out in clear terms the reasons 
for the U.S./South Vietnamese thrusts against the Communist military forces 
sheltering in Cambodia.
     This was a message from a President pledged to a certain program 
involving the welfare and security of South Vietnam. It might be as well to 
recall here the simple words he used towards the end of his speech, which you 
would probably have heard or read. He said, and I quote "...during my campaign 
for the Presidency, I pledged to bring Americans home frcm Vietnam. They are 
coming home. I promised to end the war. I shall keep that promise. I promised 
to win a just peace. I shall keep that promise. We shall avoid a wider war. 
But we are also determined to put an end to this war."
     He then went on to remind us that, from the room in which he was 
speaking, John F. Kennedy made the great decision which removed Soviet nuclear 
missiles from Cuba and the Western Hemisphere. This then was the background 
against which President Nixon informed the world of his response to the 
threatening situation in Cambodia. He spoke in clear terms, with firmness and 
resolve. He gave a stark account of the intolerable position that had arisen 
in Cambodia, and the implications of that situation for not, only the allied forces 
in Vietnam, but for the cause of freedom throughout the world.
     The President made the following points (1) That for the past five 
years the United States had provided no military assistance and no economic aid 
whatever to Cambodia — but North Vietnam had not respected the neutrality of 
the Cambodians; (2) For the past five years North Vietnam had occupied military 
sanctuaries along the Cambodian frontier with South Vietnam, used for hit—and- 
run attacks on American and South Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam; (3) North 
Vietnam in the last two weeks had stripped away all the pretence of respecting 
the neutrality of Cambodia, and thousands of North'Vietnamese soldiers were 
invading the country from the sanctuaries.
     President Nixon said if the North Vietnamese effort succeeded, 
Cambodia would become a vast enemy staging area and springboard for attacks on 
South Vietnam along 600 miles of frontier — and a refuge where enemy troops 
could return from combat without fear of retaliation. The jìnited States, said 
the President, had three options._- One was to do nothing -. in which case the

~

                           2.

      Americans remaining in Vietnam after the next withdrawal would be gravely 
      threatened. The second was to provide massive military help to Cambodia. 
      But massive amounts of military assistance could not be rapidly and 
      effectively utilised by the small Cambodian Army. The third choice was to
      go to the heart of the trouble — the major North Vietnamese and Viet Cong 
      occupied sanctuaries in Cambodia.
           President Nixon then went on to describe plans for the moves 
      against the enemy. A major responsibility for the ground operations was 
      being assumed by South Vietnamese forces. The attacks in several areas 
      including the area of -Cambodia known as the Parrot's Beak — just over 
      30 miles from Saigon itself — were exclusively South Vietnamese ground 
      operations under South Vietnamese command with the U.S. providing air and 
      logistical support. In a second area, American and South Vietnamese units 
      combined to attack the headquarters for the entire Communist military 
      operation in South Vietnam. This key control centre had been occupied by
      the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong for years in blatant violation of Cambodia's 
      neutrality.
           "This", said the President — and I am quoting him — "is not an 
      invasion of Cambodia. The areas in which these attacks will be launched are 
      completely occupied and controlled by North Vietnamese forces. Our purpose 
      is not to occupy the areas. Once enemy forces are driven out of these
      sanctuaries and their military supplies destroyed, we will. withdraw". I end 
      the quote there.
           President Nixon then examined the record of events in the Vietnam 
      war. The U.S. had stopped the bombing of North Vietnam. Air operations had 
      been cut by over 20 per cent. The withdrawal of over 250,000 troops had been 
      announced. The U.S. had offered to withdraw all its troops if the Communists 
      withdrew theirs. The U.S. had offered tc negotiate all issues with only one 
      condition — that the future of South Vietnam be determined not by North 
     Vietnam, not by the U.S., but by the people of South Vietnam themselves.
          The answer, the President said, had been intransigence at'the 
     conference table, belligerence in Hanoi, massive military aggression in Laos
     and Cambodia and- stepped—up attacks in South Vietnam, designed to increase 
     American casualties.
          The President went on — and I quote — "This attitude has become 
     intolerable. We will not react to this threat to American lives merely by 
     plaintive diplomatic protests. If we did, the credibility of the United 
     States would be destroyed in every area of the world where only the power 
     of the United States deters aggression". He continued that the leaders 
     of North Vietnam were on notice that the U.S. would be patient in working 
     for peace. "But", he said, "we Will not be humiliated. We will not be 
     defeated. We will not allow American men by the thousands to be killed by

                                     3.
m.    an enemy from privileged sanctuaries".

                 Today, the President said, we lived in an age of anarchy both abroad 
      and at home. We saw mindless attacks on all the great institutions which had 
      been created by free civilisations in the last 500 years. In the U.S. great 
      universities were being systematically destroyed. Small nations all over the 
      world found themselves under attack from within and without. If, when the 
      chips were down, the U.S. acted like a pitiful helpless giant, the forces of 
      totalitarianism and anarchy wouldthreaten free nations and free institutions
     throughout the world.
                On Tuesday night, the Prime Minister told Parliament that the U.S.
     decision was taken on operational military grounds and was designed to protect
     the lives of Allied servicemen. Our own Australian forces were not engaged in
     the operation, and he saw no prospect that they would be. But the effect of 
     the operation could_ well be to make all Allied forces in South Vietnam, including 
     our own, more safe. We wished to see a neutral Cambodia, the Prime Minister 
     said - a country which was not used by anyone as a base or a battleground. 
     Australia would try by diplomatic means to bring this about; and to bring about 
     a method of international inspection designed to ensure that respect for the 
     neutrality of Cambodia was real and continuing.
               The action taken by the U.S. and South Vietnam was action to protect 
     the servicemen against attack by an enemy which was increasingly occupying a
     neutral nation  The Government understood the reason for their action - but 
     found it odd that the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Whitlam, should on behalf 
     of his Party viciously criticise it. It was worth noting that not one member 
     of the Opposition, at any time, had criticised the violation of Cambodian 
     neutrality during the last five years by North Vietnam. But now that counter-
     action had occurred, our Allies were criticised. They were charged with 
     widening the war; they were charged with being in the wrong. Such comments, 
     the Prime Minister continued, were support for the theory that Communist forces 
     should be allowed to operate as and when they liked; that they should be
     excused for invading and occupying neutral countries; and that it was wrong to 
    take action to stop them. By giving that support, continued the Prime Minister, 
    they showed.a willingness, even a desire, to accept defeat or surrender of 
    Allied forces in South Vietnam.

FOR PRESS
         DEb'ENCE PURCHASES BOOST CAPACITY
   Australia's three services were now better equipped and better housed than
ever before in our history, the Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence, Mr.
Malcolm Fraser, said today.
   Mr. Fraser was commenting on recent decisions to acquire just under $166
million worth of defence equipment for the armed services.
   He described how the capacity of our forces would be improved by the new
equipment program.
   Our maritime capability, he said, would be improved by the two additional
Oberon submarines to be purchased. The Government was also continuing with the
design studies for a new class of light destroyers.
   Our strategic mobility would be boosted by a logistic cargo ship which would
carry the Army's landing craft and other equipment supplies.
   Our tactical mobility would be increased by the 11 helicopter gunships, as
well as the 84 light observation and 42 utility helicopters to be purchased.
   Doubling of the RAN's Skyhawk aircraft to 20would give a significant
lift to our offensive capability.
   The Government had also authorised the Army to order up to $60 million worth
of capital equipment to improve the equipment in the Regular Army and the Citizen
Military Forces, including additional armoured personnel carriers.
   Ten years ago the Army comprised only three battalions with a total Regular
force of some 21,900,said Mr. Fraser, Toady there were nine battle—proved battalions
and in addition three squadrons of Special Air Service forces, totalling around 44,500.
   Ten years ago, the main operational elements of the RAAF comprised 10 squadrons.
Today there were 14 operational squadrons. In 1960 RAAF strength was about 15,500,
and now it had grown to 22,800.
   The Navy had grown in the decade from 21 ships in commission in 1960 to more
than 55 in commission or on order today. Naval strength had grown from just over
10,600 fulltime personnel then to 17,400 today.
   The last decade had seen the greatest building program for the services
in Australia's history, said Mr. Fraser.
   Other major works proposals were under consideration.
   Mr. Fraser said over the past ten years the Government had spent $413 million
on capital works and real estate procurement programs for the services and the
Department of Supply.
   A further $56 million had been provided for houses for servicemen under
the Commonwealth—States Housing Agreement. In the current financial year additional
amounts of $49 million and $10 million would be spent.




                     o

