<!--start metadata-->
Title: Federal election
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 13/04/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                   1-71 A
            By: MALCOM FRAth • IVALIVZ:i FO W.AhN3 B R2i/J 2
            In this Autumn Session of the Federal Parliament, people 
have quite naturally been looking towards the end of the your when 
the Federal elections will be held. Political forecasts have often 
proved completely false, but there are one or two interesting facts 
that hare come to ight since the last electioniswhich could materially 
effect the next. As you know,at the lest State electionsin „ueenslund, 
the Labor Government split in two parties, muchthe same as had
happened in Victorie1 ometime before. As a result of this, the 
Country Party and the Liberal Party Government has since been formed
in that State.  Pas interesting point is that on the basis of the 
4,ueensland State election figures, there will not be one member of the 
Australian Labor Party coming from ,ueensland after the next elections. 
This reason is not based on my own imagination, it is based on the 
actual votes that were caratat the last ,ueensland elections. This 
kind of thing is a symptom, not only of the Government's record, but 
also of the chaos into which the Opposition has fallen and from which
Shoes no signs of arising.
                 I am under no illusion about the fact that es a
Liberal, I probably gain a fewItotos from this distress within the 
Labor Party but, I also know quite well, even though it may give me 
some short lived advantage, it is rstto the best interest of :',ustralia 
as a whole. Our democratic system works beet when we have two strong
and vigorous parties,   strong in Government and one strong in
Opposition. At the mosseet, we have one party which has never been 
 stronger in its history and we have another one whose sorry story of 
 disintegration you know only too well and which has never been weaker 
 in its whole history. This is not a good thing for Australia.
                 Various personalities have come to the forefront durin 
 the past few weeks, The most distinguished buck bancher to came into 
 the Government's ranks for many years was sworn in as the Member for the 
 Sydney seat of karrametta. Be is Sir Garfield Barwick of High Court 
 and Privy Council fume, Many people will remember him for the way 
 he has fought various cases before the Courts and it will be interesting 
 indeed, to watch his career and advocacy in Parliament.

                           2 -

~       It will be worth noting too the career of Mr. Alex

Downer who has just been made Minister. for Immigration. He le one 

of the youngest man who has oome into aarliament since 1949 and he 

holds the South Australian seat of .Pngas. Many people in the border

line electorates have often looked enviously at his majority which 
is about 19,000.

        Er, Downer was a prisoner-of-war held in Japanese hands 

for several years. In Parliament, he has served on ereign Affairs 

Committees and has, for the last year or two, been serving on the

Conetitutioi nl Corn ittee, which will bring in a report, in a few 
Months, on proposed changes in our Constitution. There is no chub$ 
of hie very real ability and we should wish him well.

         Sir Arthur Fadden resigned from the leadership of the 

Country z-arty, just before Laster. He has had a distinguishea career

 as Treasurer, blinging in more budgets than any other. Sir Arthur 

 will always be remembered for his warm hearted friendship towards all 

 people and for the way in which he has led the Country Party for 

 eighteen difficult years. It is not always remembered that he wee 

 originally a compromise leader elected because other factions in the 

 Country Party could not decide between Sir Earle Page and Mr. Ucewen.

 It is a bribute to his ability that these two people have been with 
 him for these eighteen years, and have given him unswerving loyalty.

           It is not always remembered that the Federal Government 

 is a Coalition Government between the Liberal Party and the Country

 Party.  It is quite clearly the most successful Coalition in the 

 history of the British Commonwealth. Before this, coalitions had

 been short lived. Its success has been due, in no small part, to 

 the way in which the Prime Minister and Sir Arthur Fadden have worked 

 together and to the way in which Sir Arthur Padden has quite frankly

 admitted that he is the Junior Partner. Sir Arthur will hold his 
 position as Treasurer until the end of this year. We can only hope

 that after' that time, he will remain in Parliament as a private 
 Member because the place will not be the same without him.

           Mr. John Mc wen, as you by nowc know, has been elected 
 Leader of the Country Party and is consequently Deputy Prime Minister.
 His strength of purpose and undoubted ability is recognised by 
 everyone. He should7bl wortry successor.




 16/14/1958.

  j                       e 3


       In addition to these changes ti a$ Departmeeta of Supp 
and. Defence kroduction are being amalgamated into one.
       There is one point that I would like to make. In the   the
debates, the Opposition made great play of the tact that Wae report of/
MOrehead Committee Web not made availublu to l'arliement. .uite 
categorically I say it could not have been made available for a
very sound reason.  Tho Committee was composed very largely of 
public servants under the ohairmanstip of General Loorshead. Itwas
not a Parliamentary Committee. It was u Coitt  set up by Cabinet 
to report to Cabinet. If public servants ere going to rind when 
they make such i report thut their views and opinion are to be 
canvassed 80rObS the floor of the House, we will very seen find that 
public servants will not take positions oil such conditions. Neverthe- 
less, the krims Minister did say mite clearly what the recommendations 
of ta Committee were and he said quite Osidatig clearly what the 
Government had accepted and what the GoVerunteut had rejected.
        Finally, the Committee was not designed to examine
overall Defence planning and strategy. It was designed to exmine 
the administration of the Defence Departments from every angle. 
The purpose was to achieve greuter integration and greater control 
at the very highest level and, ut the same time, to improve the pure 
military advice which the Military Authorities submitted to the
Cabinet.   The appointment of the Chairman of the Chiefs of staff 
Committee and the new supremacy of the Minister for Wonge should
achieve these results,
                           40.01.1•01...1111.100MMIPWIN.

8/4/1958.

