<!--start metadata-->
Title: Federal election
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 10/12/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           BROADCAST:                      3HA Sunday, 10 December 
                                           3YB Thursday, 14 December 
                                           3LK Wednesday, 13 December


                   At the polls a few days ago, the people of Wannon 
           gave me the opportunity to represent them in Federal Parliament 
           for a further three years.


                   Within Wannon, the fight was a tough but a fair one, 
           and I pay tribute to my opponents, particularly the principal 
           one, Mr. Garth, for that.


                   In Australia at large, the Liberal and Country Parties 
           have been forced_ to accept that substantial numbers of people 
           decided that Labor should be given the chance to prove itself
           in office.   After 23 years in government, we must take our 
           place on the opposition benches.


                   In these circumstances, there are two main points I 
           want to make - first about the Liberal Party one second atout 
           myself.


                   I believe the Liberal-Country Party Government presented 
           to the people sound, realistic and progressive policies based 
           on the philosophy which has guided us for decades, a philosophy 
•          of personal freedom, of free enterprise and the encouragement 
           of individual initiative on the land, in the cities, and in all 
           walks of life.


                   In the coming few weeks we must analyse where we went
           wrong in the eyes of the electorate.  Many people have different 
           explanations, but I believe we must avoid at all costs coming 
           to hasty conclusions which are not firmly based.


                   Some commentators predicted the fragmentation of the
           Liberal Party in the event of defeat at the polls. All the
           indications so far are proving them very wrong. A new 
           resolve is emerging within the Party - the spirit of the
           future.               And every member of the Party I've
           spoken to has this same determination to regain public support at 
           the earliest opportunity.

                                                              .../2

                                     2•



                   At a personal level, naturally, I am very pleased to be 
           your member for Wannon for a further term. As in the last 17 
           years, I will continue to do my best to represent the interests
           of all people of Wannon, no matter what their politics.   While 
           I owe a great debt to those who supported me at the polls and 
           especially to those who worked for my return, nevertheless, I 
           have always believed that my obligation as a Member of Parliament 
           extends to every single person in the electorate.


                   Within Parliament and outside it, I will continue my 
 ~         efforts on behalf of Australia's primary industries, and will 
           pursue my special interest in wool at a time when important 
           changes in marketing can be expected to flow from the anticipated 
           recommenations of the new Australian Wool Corporation.


                   I believe it is important that the voice of Australia's 
           country people in Federal Parliament should be strong and effective. 
           With my colleagues from country electorates, I shall certainly 
           ensure this.


                   Being in opposition doesn't mean that one must oppose
           everything.   If the new Government introduces measures which 
~          I believe are in the interests of Australians, then I will say
           so.   But if I believe they are against the interests of the 
           people, then I will oppose them with all my vigour.

                   My purpose in opposition will be to debate positively 
           and constructively.


                   Finally, may I wish you all a merry Christmas and a 
           prosperous and happy New Year.



                                       000000000000

