<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth aid for roads
Description: press statement
Date: 29/03/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRESS STATEIENT:

          MA.LCOLM FRASER:

                                                               March 29th,1964


                               COMMONWEALTH AID FOR ROADS


                      A short while ago all the Premiers, together with a certain 
          number of officials, came to Canberra to argue once again about the cut- 
          up of the funds that the Commonwealth is prepared to make available for 
          road finance.

                      All the usual pressures and one or two additional ones were 
          at work in the days preceding this particular conference.

                      In general terms it has been a question of how much money 
          should go to each State, and thus the Premiers would argue about the 
          formula which was used to decide this.

                      It will be remembered that before the last five-year 
          program 60% of the funds were divided on a population basis and 40% were 
•         divided on an area basis. This was way back before 1959. This was 
          recognised to operate unjustly so far as Victoria was concerned, and 
          largely as a result of pressures from Victoria the formula was changed 
          and the funds are now cut up one-third each based on area, population 
          and motor vehicle density. This changed formula made a great deal of 
          difference to Victoria because the density of traffic on the Victorian 
          roads is higher than in the other States, and it also reduced the influence 
          of the area component which, of course, operates against Victoria.

                      The present formula is, I believe, a reasonable compromise, 
          because while Victoria has a much greater vehicle population it hasn't 
          got the tremendous distances as have Queensland and Western Australia, 
          and these distances impose difficulties of communication which are 
          extremely difficult to overcome.

                      Especially during the days of the last program which is just 
          coming to a close, country roads in Victoria have improved tremendously. 
         This is evident to everyone who travels. The dirt roads are becoming 
         rare, and before long I would think, most of the Victorian roads that 
         carry any volume of traffic will be sealed.

                      In my view, if in this new program the rate of progress and 
         development that we have seen in the last five years can be continued, 
         then we will not be going too far astray. The new funds will make this 
         possible.

                      In the Prime Minister's policy speech the Prime Minister 
         said that not less than £350,000,000 will be made available over the next 
         five years by the Commonwealth. This would have been £100,000,000 more 
         than over the last five years. As matters have turned out this sum of
         £350,000,000 has been increased by a further £25,000,000.  This, of 
         course, does not represent all the money that is spent on roads, because 
         State Governments raise very large sums of money for themselves. This 
         is provided from registration and license fees, and as business and 
         activity expand and as the number of cars on the roads increase funds 
         from these sources are automatically increased.

                      In the five years of the old arrangement which will end in
         June of this year, Victoria received just over £50,000,000. In the five 
         years of the new arrangement to operate from July 1st, Victoria will get 
         just under £74,000,000.

                              ~ 2 -


               The Commonwealth has made no new restrictions about this 
money, where or how it should be used. The present provision is that 
40% of the funds made available by the Commonwealth must be spent on 
roads in rural areas other than highways, main roads or trunk roads. 
This is a good provision because it has meant that the secondary couhrtry 
roads in Victoria have improved tremendously in the last few years.

               It is well known that Lord Meyors of the Capital Cities 
pressed for special grants to be spent in city. areas. The Commonwealth's 
view is that there are considerable sums available to the States and that 
it should be their own decision as to whether they want to spend more 
funds in the capital cities or outside them. The only restriction the 
Commonwealth places is this 40% I have mentioned. As for the rest it is 
left to the State's discretion.

NO INCREASED TAX:

               One or two States wanted an increased petrol tax of about 
3d. a gallon, provided all this money was spent on roads. This proposal
didn't get much enthusiastic support.  It would have further penalised
people who use petrol on farms and properties off the roads. If the one 
or two States which wanted this increased tax imposed really felt they 
needed the extra money they would, of course, be able to increase their 
own State taxes to give the same result. As it is , the States that 
said they wanted this petrol tax imposed have already made public state- 
ments that their own taxes will not be increased.

COMMONWEALTH BUREAU FOR ROADS:

               There is one other matter that came out of the conference. 
The Treasurer announced that the Commonwealth is going to set up a federal 
body to make a full and continuous study of all matters related to roads, 
their maintenance and construction. Such a body should get itself into 
the position in which it can advise the Commonwealth on a national program 
for roads. This would be a small body and it would not be designed to 
take away from the States the important and vital functions which are now 
fulfilled by the States. It would be an advisory body - it would not be 
responsible for road construction even in the territories of the Common- 
wealth. Such a body would have to establish good relationships with all 
the States, otherwise its advice would be worthless. The body would be 
given statutory authority under the Minister for Shipping and Transport, 
and it would be called the Commonwealth Bureau for Roads.

               One of the important functions that this body will be asked 
to perform will be to decide how much of the nation's resources should be 
spent on roads from time to time. It is well known that an almost unlimited 
amount of money could be spent on roads, and many people want more money 
spent than is being spent, but others who are interested in other things 
all want more money for their own particular projects, and the national 
resources have to be divided as well as possible in the national interest.

               Once it gets into operation and has earned the respect of 
the States the Commonwealth Bureau for Roads should have an important and 
useful part to play.


                                 000

