<!--start metadata-->
Title: Economy, redistribution
Description: Broadcast
Date: 1/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                    3YB  THURSDAY  5TH APRIL 1973
$ROADVXST                           3 I WE 1 ESDAY 4TH APRIL 1973
                    r  --Q
Many of you know that I am concerned about the future of the rural
community.  We are fortunate that prices are at the moment good for our 
major export products, because a number of other factors are moving
against us.   We have had two successive revaluations. We have positive 
moves for a 35-hour week and positive moves for wage increases - which 
I would support if I believed they were going to add to the real standards 
of living of the people concerned, and not merely push up the cost
structure in the whole community.

We have had the rural reconstruction funds cut in half, and attempts made
to increase the rate of interest. Even though prices are better, it is still 
important for people to consolidate their positions, so that they will be 
better able to withstand difficult circumstances in the future. We have 
seen funds for research and promotion for the International Wool
Secretariat held up because the new Government has not supported decisions 
that we made and announced to the Australian Wool Industry Conference well
before the last election. As a result, wool industry and the research 
bodies are in a state of wonder and doubt about the future. There are 
prospects that Government research funds will be cut and the wheat 
industry leaders are already in difficulty with Government and Treasury 
officials over a negotiation of a new stabilisation plan. We have also 
got Mr. Cameron's unwillingness to reverse the levy which is doing so 
much damage to Portland's, and to other decentralised ports' general 
cargo trade.

If these events had occurred with the prices at last year's levels, the 
result would have been utter disaster. Their long term consequences can 
still be immensely serious.

All this leads to the point that there is a necessity to maintain a strong 
rural voice throughout Australia. We are the most centralised country in 
the world, and if we are to establish an electoral system which transfers 
a significant number of seats from the country to the city, then you are 
going to add to the demands to spend more funds in the great cities, and

2.

and reduce the prospects of achieving proper support for rural areas.

Primary Industry groups, and all people who live in rural communities might 
regard the matters I have mentioned as important, but an event that 
occurred last week is more important than all. This is the Government's
Electoral Bill.  It is a bill that is designed to increase the number of
city based Members of Parliament.  It's a bill that would significantly
weaken the rural voice in the Parliament. Maybe that is not surprising
when Al Grassby and Rex Patterson — both with a knowledge and concern 
for rural matters — were both denied the prospects of managing primary
industry matters in the new Government. The Government's measure will 
reduce the number of country seats by six or seven.

They want to do this by two simple measures.  The Distribution Commissioners
can now vary the number of voters in an electorate by up to 20% of the
quota.   They want to reduce that variation to 10%. In addition the bill 
seeks to delete from the criteria which the Commissioners take into 
account, any reference to distances, sparseness of population, or area.

If the Government's measures were implemented, I have no doubt that rural 
seats would be larger in population than the seats on the outskirts of 
Melbourne or Sydney, and if there is anyone who doubts that, I can take 
them through the proposed amendments and demonstrate it in detail. This 
is a matter of concern for everyone who lives in rural communities. It is 
often difficult for people in cities to understand the problems of people
who live in the remoter areas.  If we are to have a redistribution of 
the kind envisaged by the Government, it will be impossible for people to 
be properly represented.

The Liberal Party will be opposing this measure withall the resources at 
its command. The Country Party will be opposing.it. I believe thr D.L.P.
will be opposing it.  We have made up our minds that it will be opposed
in the House of Representatives and in the Senate. If it is introduced a 
second time and leads to a double dissolution, then so be it, because we 
will not change our view. It is a bad measure, and one which will do 
great harm to the national Parliament.

It is interesting that the main provision the Government wants to remove

3.

has been in the Electoral Act since 1902. In the Federal sphere, the 
redistributions have always hitherto been regarded as fair. In most 
countries the electoral laws allow for significant variations from the 
average to take account of community, of interest and many of the factors 
that are in our present law.

Perhaps the ultimate test of the fairness of the redistributions that 
we have introduced is that for the first time in which the Labor 
Government has had a majority of votes tieNOWIWAI.e, it won government,
and that is what happened in 1972. In all the other elections the 
 Labor Party failed to win government because it failed to win 50% of
 the votes.  These circumstances must be the real test of the justice 
 and fairness of an electoral system.

