<!--start metadata-->
Title: Costigan Royal Commission, unions, bottom of the harbour tax evasion schemes
Description: Electorate talks
Date: 12/09/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•





                           ,135j»» p4pgL1.




                  PRIME MINISTER




    FOR MEDIA                       SUNDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 1982


                         ELECTORATE TALK


    It was my Government, with the previous Liberal Government 
    in Victoria, which set up the Costigan Royal Commission, and 
    the Commission's findings have validated that decision 
    a thousand fold. We set the Commission up because we were 
    determined to get to the bottom of the stories about evil and 
    crime associated with the notorious Painters and Dockers' Union, 
    and my Government is now totally determined to eradicate the 
    criminality and fraud that is exposed.

    Australians everywhere are disturbed that corruption and
    organised crime on such a scale exists in our community. 
    Eradicating it will in many cases call for new techniques, 
    drawing upon the computer applications Mr Costigan has pioneered, 
    and matching the sophistication of modern cheats and criminals. 
    The critics of this Royal Commmission - and there were some - have 
    been silenced. Mr Cain, for example, can no longer label the 
    Commission a "political stunt" as he did earlier this year, 
    and I only hope his new-found enthusiasm for the Commission's 
    work will be matched by effective practical action under state 
    law, and in relation to the Painters and Dockers' affiliation 
    with the Labor Party.

    My Government is taking immediate action on several fronts, legislation 
    enabling the appointment of a special prosecutor for bottom of the harbour 
    tax evasion schemes was passed through the House of Representatives 
    last week. and a task force of police, taxation officers and 
    lawyers to assist the special prosecutor is already established. 
    Further task forces will be established as required for specific 
    areas of criminal activity. The inaction within the Deputy 
    Crown Solicitor's Perth Office on prosecutions has led to the 
    suspension and charging of three officers. Mr Tony Smith has 
    been nominated by the President of the Law Council of Australia 
    to conduct an examination of the Perth Office and4the staffing 
    needs of the Crown Solicitor's Division are being investigated.

    At the Government's request, Mr Costigan consented to the 
    publication of an important chapter of the confidential part of 
    the Report. That chapter was immediately made public last 
    week, and it shows the extent of organised crime in Australia. 
    Mr Costigan has asked that the rest of the Report should not 
    be made public at this stage, partly because doing so could damage 
    the Commission's current investigations, and partly because 
    publication now would make it impossible for people who will 
    be charged with offences to get a fair trial.

                    2


My Government accepts Mr Costigan's requests unreservedly. 
Anyone who believes in fairness, and in the importance of 
Mr Costigan's work, would obviously accept the need for 
confidentiality at this stage. This is why I have condemned 
absolutely the deliberate way Mr Hayden has been dropping hints 
about who is named in the reports, and smearing groups within 
the Australian community. Because of Mr Hayden's tactic, the 
entire Australian community has a right to know that Mr Costigan 
wrote to me about the speculation on the confidential parts 
of his reports and said: "It would be quite inaccurate to draw 
any specific inference as to what names might appear in those 
volumes, or whether they come from any particular state or 
territory or country or have associations with any political 
organisation or group".

I also want to say something about the recovery of unpaid
taxation, because Mr Costigan's findings have highlighted this 
issue, although the Government had already announced action before the
 budget, and before the Report was published. The tax avoidance industry has been 
effectively attacked by earlier legislation, we will continue to 
be vigilant and act against new schemes, and the main question
 now is to recoup taxes avoided by those who have used the
 bottom of the harbour schemes. The Government will legislate 
 to recover taxes that were unpaid as a result of bottom of the 
 harbour schemes. It is important for people to know how
 bottom of the harbour schemes worked, because I do not believe 
 anyone could have taken part without knowing they were wrong.


 Let me try and explain it in these terms. If there is a company 
 with say $100 worth of assets, plus $10 tax due to be paid 
 to the Commonwealth, and somebody comes along and says, look, 
 "I can buy that company off you, all you will have to do is 
 give me the company papers, and then you will be able to keep 
 for yourselves the $100 for the assets and the $10 of tax, 
 you won't have to pay the tax, all you will have to do is 
 pay me a commission of $2 for the deal." The promotor, having 
 got his commission, then dumped the papers inthe bottom of the 
 harbour. But how could the seller have failed to know he 
 was doing something wrong by getting out of the tax liability 
 in this way? The Government had decided to legislate to recover 
 this unpaid tax because of our determination that people should 
 not escape or avoid their fair share of taxes.

 I know some people have concerns about retrospectivity, no 
 Liberal likes retrospectivity. But I believe it is even more 
 important to demonstrate our total commitment to a tax system 
 which operates in a fair way, because any loss of confidence 
 by average Australians in the fairness of the system would 
 undermine the way of life we believe in.
 The principle of fairness is absolutely fundamental for 
 Liberals, it is more fundamental than any other principle, 
 certainly more fundamental than any element of retrospectivity
 in the proposed legislation. The Liberal Party
 was founded to govern fairly in the interests of all
 Australians, and fairness is a principle basic to Liberals 
 and support for this principle is absolutely fundamental to 
 Liberal thinking, and I would not want to lead or be part of 
 any party which failed to stand by that principle.

                              - 3


There is another issue Mr Costigan raised, the need to "have 
available a prosecuting arm charged with the responsibility
of immediately attending to any      prosecutions that may arise 
in the course of the Commission" (10.59). The Government 
has already established a special prosecutor and this goes 
a long way to satisfying Mr Costigan's aims. However, in the 
long term, it is fundamental that there be established a body 
which both has an investigative and prosecuting role and it 
is with this objective that my Government has proposed the
establishment of a National Crimes Commission.    Only a 
body invested with such powers will have the capacity to deal 
effectively with modern crime.

Mr Costigan's findings clearly emphasise that traditional 
law enforcement methods have failed. This is most evident 
in New South Wales as reports of Royal Commissions and task 
forces over recent years have demonstrated. ..I believe that 
the seriousness of Mr Costigan's findings, the apparent depth 
and strength of organised crime in Australia, demonstrates the 
need for a properly structured National Crimes Commission, 
and I very much hope that the states will be willing to join 
with the Commonwealth in this. Australia needs law enforcement 
agencies which are adequate to understand and root out modern 
crime, and my Government is determined to do everything in
its power to achieve these objectives.     The positive action 
we are taking and proposing all leads in this direction, and it 
is all totally consistent with Mr Costigan's proposals.

My Government's record on the Costigan findings is one of 
positive action and resolve. It stands in stark contrast 
with the barren and baseless politicking of our opponents. 
Mr Hayden is to be congratulated on his move to disaffiliate 
the Painters and Dockers' Union from the ALP. But Parliament 
will be degraded if Mr Hayden continues to heap blame on 
categories of people who are not even named in the Report. 
I will condemn that tactic whether it is practised by Mr Hayden, 
or by any member of any party, including my own.

So far as my Government is concerned, we will be getting on 
with the job, taking positive action in the light of the 
Commission's findings, and along the lines it soundly proposes.







                           ---o0o----

