<!--start metadata-->
Title: Arbitration
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: c1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                            ARBITRATION..



             When we look at our political history, we/ find many things of which 
we can be proud. 'Je were amongst the first countries in the world to give the vote 
to every man and every woman.1ndustrial Arbitration is our own invention. i'he
system has    n in operation over fifty years, and although it has been criticised
by many     eefrom both sides of politics, until recently we thought that the 
main principle of Arbitration-had Won the acceptance of every decent Australian.
              The purpose of industrial arbitration is to establish an impartial 
non—political body that can settle disputes between employer and employee. The 
fundamental part of Arbitration is that the people from both sides must agree to 
abide by the decision of the Court. Only in this way can disorder and chaos be 
avoided and a stable and sound system of settling industrial disputes be developed.. 
It was Australia's pride that she created such a system.
             We must remember that nobody in the wide world had ever heard of 
such a thing as a Basic Wage until our Commonwealth Arbitration Court invented it. 
.+e must remember that it was the Arbitration Court that awarded first the forty— 
eight, then the fortyfour, and now the forty hour week. we must remember that it 
wqs the Arbitration Court thatZle prosperity pound on fso, the basic wage, which 
was rightly paidwith no complaint and no projbest.
             We must remember too that the men appointed to the Commonwealth
Arbitration Court are people of the greatest integrity and honour. The .1on.air 
Raymond i elly was first appointed by the Liberal uovernment of 1941, and was later 
appointed Chief Judge by the Labour tarty. The judges on the arbitration Gourt 
have been appointed by both parties and in their job they have no politics.
              The recent decision of the Court to suspend the quarterly cost of
living. increases came at a time when the inflationary trend had been contralled. 
The decision of the court was made only after every possible relevant detail had 
been examined., and the decision was made in good faith for Australia's bast 
interests. hem we must realise that the Court's decisions have a considerable 
effect not only on the general economic position of the country,. but also on the 
purchasing power of every individual. For example, if we cannot sell our goods 
abroad, home employment will fall., thus causing needless unhappiness. and hardship.
    court realises its great influence and acts accordingly. Through fifty years, 
the Court has protected and guarded the interests of every unionist, and in so 
doing, has won the respect of every decent Australian. 'the recent act of the Court 
is still safeguarding the prosperity of every Australian.
             it is a strange and unhappy thing that when the Court made its decision
abolishing the quarterly increase, some discontented elements amongst us immediately 
rose against the Court and its principles, thus slandering the achievements and 
tradition of over fifty years. lou will remember how varmmus State governments 
legislated as far as their powers allowed them, to nullify the decision of the Court. 
In doing this they brought political controversy into a field which Liberals had 
begun to think was one over which we no longer argued. in making it compulsory for 
the victorian wages L'oards to disregard the example of the Commonwealth Arbitration 
Court, by forcing them to continue quarterly adjustments, the ,Mate did ne4 its 
best to destroy the Court's policy. This was aimed at preservation of our export 
markets and at final stabilisation of our cost of living, so that our present 
full-employment and prosperity may continue into the future: iremember that the 
behefit from high wages is done away with if we cannot sell our goods abroad, and 
while increased efficiency is always the best way of reducing costs, the share of 
wages in costs must be carefully watched so that our goods may be competitively 
priced. In this way we will maintain the full employment and prosperity of our 
people.
             The justification of any policy must be found in the goods that
individual people can buy, not only the bare necessities of life, food to put in 
the pots and pans for the evening meal and clothes for our children, but also some 
of the luxuries. Today, in this Australia of ours, we have these things. Are must 
make sure that we keep them and preserve the institutions which have played such a 
noble part in achieving them.
            it is hard to understand the thinking of people who strike against 
our Arbitration System, which has played such a great part in our general peace
and-prosperity. without Arbitration, disorder and eitftee—we dissatisfaction 
would re—enter industry.
            no one would deny that in future years we may improve and streamline
our system of Arbitration, but at the same time it is a dangerous and unhappy
thing     when some people, to stir up discontent, question or tamper with the 
great principle of impartial judgement and of general acceptance of the Court's 
decision.

