<!--start metadata-->
Title: United Nations, five powers resolution
Description: press statement
Date: 6/11/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT
                                 November 6th,1960
MALCOLM FRASER



        Only the return of National Leaders to their own countries has enabled
                 V
 the United Nations to sett'e down quietly to its business. While the Leaders were

 there the United Nations represented a great propaganda forum where there was little 

 scope for solid discussions.

        So far as the Australians were concerned there has been great 

 controversy over the activities of the Prime Minister, and if we were to read the 

 Australian papers during the time our Prime Minister was at the United Nations we 

 might feel that what was done there represented or absorbed the major part of the 

 United Nations' tune.

        Since the Prime Minister's amendment which was moved to a five power 

 resolution asking Mir. Kruschchev and Mr. Eisenhower to meet was defeated, publicity 

 in Australia seems to have centred around nothing else. It is perhaps because of 

 this publicity that in many minds this matter has gone right out of perspective as 

 far as our relations with other countries are concerned.

        The amendment to the five power neultralist resolution was moved by 

 our Prime Minister because he thought it was wrong that anything should be done that 

 might tend to polarise present world conflict between two countries - Russia and 

 America. It is not a good thing for people to get in their minds, that the struggle 

 is between Russian Communism and America as the sole bastion of democracy. The rest

 of us are not idle onlookers. Furthermore those countries which, since the last war, 
  been
 have/known as the Big Four have played a vital part in world affairs, and since these

 four atomic powers are ones who can do most to relieve world tension, if agreement 

 can be reached between them, the Prime Minister thought that a conference of the 

 Four - Britain, France, America and Russia - would be much more useful than just a 

 meeting between Mr. Kruschchev and Mr. Eisenhower amidst the American Presidential 

 campaign - a campaign in which Mr. Eisenhower is not a candidate but rather a man 

 who will be fading from office in a few weeks' time. Surely it is much better and 

 much saner to begin negotiations with a man who is firmly in the saddle for a full 

 four years rather than with one who hAs but four weeks to go.

         It is not generally realized that at the time the Prime Sinister 

 moved his amendment to the five-power resolution the Argentine had fore-shadowed a 

 further amendment and that many of the people who did not vote for the Australian 

 amendment abstained for the simple reason that they knew they were going to support 

 the Argentinian amendment. This was one of the reasons why Australia only mustered 

 five votes.

                i 2 A


      However, it should not be forgotten that if Australia only mustered 
five votes, the votes were pretty good ones to have- America, Canada, France, the 

United Kingdom and her own.

      The main criticism that seems to be offered to what has been done 
is the effect this may have on our relationship with Asian countries. As far as 

I can see this fact has been grossly overplayed. Some of the Indian newspapers, 
and notably thh Times of India, have attacked Mr. Nehru in very much the same 

terms as the Sydney Morning Herald used for our Prime Minister. The times of 
India attacked Ir. Nehru for the angry and intemperate way in which he spoke to 

Mr. Menzies' amendment. It also attacked 'Jr1 Nehru for the substance of what 
he was trying to do.
       However, quite apart from this, the publicity that this measure 

has achieved in Australia has given it an importance in many Australian minds 
quite out of perspective in world affairs. There are many votes in the United 
Nations on many different matters - at times countries are on a winning side 
and other times they are on a losing side. We hardly ever hear of these things 

although some of them might be on matters which vitally concern the whole free 
world such as disarmament. We heard of the Australian amendment to the five- 
power resolution not because of what was in the amendment but because it was an 
Australian amendment. If one reads the newspapers of other countries the space 

given it was often very small and sometimes non-existent.

       It is not always realised that the Prime Minister made two 
speeches in the United Nations, the first one was the relatively unimportant one 
in relation to this amendment. It was the Prime Minister's maiden speech at the 
United Nations not by intention but purely because of the time table of the 

United Nations. His main speech concerned Australian foreign policy in general, 

our attitude to the Cold War, and in particular the Prime Minister referred to 
our plans for the growth of an independent multi-racial society in New Guinea. 
This was most important in view of the fact that he was speaking before many 

newly independent countries who had just been admitted to the United Nations.
This speech was hailed by many of the New York papers in plain but blunt but 
      and
welcoming terms/for one principal reason. It was hailed because a Leader
of a small country, in terms of population and resources, had had the courage 

to get to his feet to tell Mr. Kruschchev exactly what he had thought of him.

