<!--start metadata-->
Title: Papua and New Guinea
Description: press statement
Date: 28/10/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•


                                            28th October, 1960.


 PRESS STATEMENT ISSUED BY MALCOLM FRASER, M.P. MEMBER FOR WANNON,


            The Commonwealth Parliament recently amended the Papua 
 and New Guinea Bill which is, in fact, the Constitution of New 
 Guinea, The changes represent a most important landmark in the 
 progress towards self-government for New Guinea and Papua,

            Perhaps I should describe briefly the old Legislative 
 Council and the changes that the Government has introduced.

            The old Council consisted of 29 Members, including the 
 Administrator, In this old Council there were 17 official Members 
 and 12 non-official Members. The official Members are all appointed 
 by the Commonwealth Government and therefore it is clear that the 
 Administrator had a ready-made majority for anything that he wished 
 to do in the Territory, This was all right in the initial stages 
 of self-government, but the time has now come for more authority 
 to be vested in the local people of both native and non-native origin,

            In the old Council, all Members except 3 native Members 
 appointed by the Governor-General were non-native. In the new Council, 
 all appointments, whether of official or non-official Members, will 
 be open to natives as well as non-natives, The Commonwealth has laid 
 it down in the Act that there should be not less than 11 native 
 Members in the new Council, There is no statutory maximum; there 
 is only a statutory minimum, There is nothing in the law to prevent 
 all the Members being native Members although this, in practice, 
 would not happen. Of this bare minimum of il, 5 of the natives 
 would be appointed and 6 would be elected, The elected native 
 Members will not be elected in the general fashion to which we are 
 accustomed in this country. The reason for this is that there are 
 still a great number of natives of New Guinea and Papua who have 
 had little contact with the workings of democratic institutions and 
 therefore it has been felt that, for a transitional period, the 
 native Members should be elected in an Electoral College which will 
 be formed from representatives of the different native local government 
 bodies.

            It must be emphasised that the ultimate objective of the 
 Government is the common roll on which both natives and non-natives 
 would have their names placed.

            This increase in the extent of native representation is 
 one of the most significant changes in this new Constitution for the
 Territory.

            The other changes are these.

            The Legislative Council of the Territory is being expanded 
 from 29 to 37. I have already said that in the old Council there 
 were 17 official Members and only 3 native Members the rest being 
 elected or appointed non-natives, Under the new Council there will 
 be only 15 official Members and 22 non-official Members, therefore, 
 for any measure that the Administrator wishes to have brought into 
 effect he must obtain the support of some of the non-official 
 Members. There is no ready-made majority for the Government or 
 administration policy, This will place a great deal more weight 
 in the hands of the local people,

            As progress in New Guinea continues, there will be further 
 changes which will place more and more authority in the hands of

                   -2-




local inhabitants until the Territory attains full self-government 
as a multi-racial, prosperous and peaceful co uni

       The present changes represent a aiAacmd step towards 
this end. What has been achieved is all the more praiseworthy 
when you consider the fact that the last war destroyed all the 
administration and services that had previously existed.

       Since 1945, 32 thousand Australian public servants have 
been attracted to the Territory. 300 native members of the Public 
Service have been recruited and there are 7i thousand native 
employees in the Administration. There are 5 main ports properly 
equipped; 5,000 miles of road and 100 airfields. Normal services 
supplied by the Government have been improved and extended. Good 
hospital services are available throughout the Territory.
200,000 native pupils are taught in either Government or Mission 
schools. The vigorous Agriculture Department has 250 trained
native extension officers engaged in improving village agriculture. 
Furthermore, law and order have been established over 50,000 square 
miles of country which was previously in a state of savagery.

       These facts represent the bare outline of a notable 
achievement in a short period, and it is worth noting that the 
development of the Territory is not made easier by the fact that 
there are reputed to be over 200 separate native languages.

       When you have regard to the Australian achievement 
in developing the Territory and in placing more and more political 
responsibility in the local population and when you consider 
that Australia spends about £16M. in the Territory each year for 
no return at all, it is clear that Australians have a record of
which they can be proud. . When the facts are known
as they are to many Australians and as they are to people overseas 
who pay an interest in these affairs, it is difficult to understand 
how Mr. Khrushchev can make viiEious charges of colonialism against 
us. What we do in the Territory is done because of a sense of 
obligation and of duty, without return to ourselves except the pride 
that we can take in the development of what will ultimately be an 
independent nation whose goodwill we hope to have and to earn„

