<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence - Navy, Army, Air Force, General
Description: press statement
Date: 2/06/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     PRESS STA'1`ElIENT

     i~LCOLïvI FRASER:

                                                           June 2nd, 1963

                                 DEFENCE

                    In the last week of the Parliament, the Prime Minister made 
     a comprehensive review of the defence situation. The Chiefs of Staff 
     Committee and the Cabinet Defence Committee have just completed a review of 
     Australia's defence requirements bearing in mind the unsettled state of 
     matters in South East Asia and in the islands to our north.

                    The Prime Minister's statement is the strongest and most 
     effective statement that has been made on defence in peacetime.,

                    People who follow defence affairs will recall that a three 
     year defence program was introduced last October. The last paragraph of the 
     statement of the Minister for Defence at that time said that if international 
     events proved it necessary, the program so announced would be reviewed,
     This, indeed, has been done..


                                    NAVY

                    The matters the Prime Minister mentioned are all additional 
     to the program announced by the Minister for Defence and they are also 
     additional to the naval program announced in January which involved the 
    purchase of an additional guided missile destroyer and of four. Oberon class
     submarines.  In addition, the Government has now approved the provision of 
     fitting the Ikara anti-submarine missile which is being developed in Australia, 
    with United States co-operation, into the Type 12 frigates and into the guided 
    missile destroyers,. This will be a most effective anti-submarine weapon. 
     In addition, a 15,000 ton escort maintenance ship is going to be built in 
    Australia. Australia's aircraft carrier "Melbourne" will continue in operation 
    not merely as a helicopter carrier, as orginally planned, but the Venoms and the 
    Gannets will continue to operate until the end of their useful life when a 
    further decision will be taken on a fixed wing aircraft for the carrier.

                   The strength of the Navy will be increased from 13,900 to
    14,300. 


•

                                   ARMY

                   Last year,a decision to raise the Army strength from.21,000
    to 24,500 by 1965 was announced. The Prime Minister has now announced a 
    further increase to 28,000. The permanent field forces will be expanded by 
    the formation of a third Regular battle group which will add considerably to
    the flexibility of our forces. It will be recalled that, several years ago, 
    the Australian Army was re-organized to suit 'it to operations in South-east 
    Asia, which is thought to be the most likely point of Australian operations. 
    As a result, a division now comprises five battle groups. Each battle group 
    is formed from one enlarged battalion together with a field regiment and 
    elements of an armoured regiment, depending upon the nature and theatre of 
    operations._ The armoured or artillery force can be reduced or expanded as 
    required in each battle group. The battle group is designed to be able to 
    operate effectively on its own.

                  The C.M.F. target strength of 32,500 will be increased to 
    35,000. Major purchases of new equipment have also been approved for the


                  At the present time, current expenditure on new equipment is

                                        2



       running at an annual rate of about £11M. The Government has approved the 
       provision of equipment and reserves needed by the Regular Army and the C.M.F. 
       for a complete division of five battle groups with appropriate combat support 
       and logistic units. As a result, the annual expenditure on equipment of
       £llM. will rise to nearly £18M.. As a result of these measures, it is 
       estimated that the Army vote will rise from £68M. this year to £97M, by 
       1967-68,







                                  AIR      FORCE




                   A number of important new projects have been approved for the
       Air Force.  It will be recalled that some time ago, the Government ordered 
       60 Dassault Mirage III jet fighters to replace the Avon Sabres. This fighter 
       is second to none in the world at the present time. The first Mirage III will 
       be delivered to Australia at the end of this year.. Deliveries of the
410    remainder will then continue with an ever-increasing quantity of locally 
       assembled and constructed components.. A further 40 Mirage have been ordered 
       bringing the total to 100. In addition, two new control and reporting 
       units to ensure the effective employment of fighter aircraft are being 
       purchased.


                   Tactical air transport is a vital necessity for a modern Army.. 
       This could be more important than in old armies because modern weapons have 
       greatly increased the fire power available and, as a result, the same number 
       of men today would require much more ammunition than 30 years ago,.


                   Last October, the Government had approved the purchase of 8 
       heavy lift helicopters and 12 fixed wing short take-off and landing craft, 
       subject to evaluation and selection by the R.A.A.F. Suitable heavy lift 
       helicopters for our purpose are found to be unavailable, therefore the 
       Government has decided to buy 8 more Bell Iroquois utility helicopters in 
       addition to the 16 already approved and tò purchase 18 Caribou Mark 1 fixed 
       wing aircraft which have a proved capability as a short take-off and landing 
       aircraft in South-East Asian conditions.. These are aircraft that will not
       need a sophisticated airstrip from which to operate. The introduction of 
       both these types will add to the strategic mobility provided by the Hercules 
       0130 transports.



       GENERAL :


                   These new projects will require an increased personnel strength
       for the Air Force and thus the present target of 16, 500 will be increased
       to about 18,300.. The Prime Minister also said that the Air Force would be 
       actively examining the question of replacing the "Canberra" as a strike
       reconnaissance bomber.  While the "Canberra" is not obsolete, it is 
       considered that its replacement should be close at hand. It will be a 
       question of when the appropriate bomber suitable for our conditions is avail- 
       able,. A team will be sent overseas under the Chief of the Air Staff to 
       investigate and report on this matter,.


                   The scope of these extensions can be judged from the increased 
       expenditure involved. Under the plan announced by Er. Townley in October, 
       the Government's expenditure of £212M,.this year was going to increase to 
       £220Ii,.in 1966-67.. Actual expenditure in the new program will rise to
       £277M,.. Thus, the increase in the later years of the program will be over 
       £50M.. more in each year than originally planned.



                                                                      /3.

                                  -  ~ -



                 The Government realises that such an increased expenditure on 
      defence will impose substantial additional burdens on the Commonwealth Budget 
      in a period in which the need for national development is of the greatest 
      possible importance •- more important for us than it is for older and more
      developed countries. It is the Government's view that these additional 
      burdens will be accepted by the australian people. Even with this increased 
      expenditure, the percentage of national income that Australia spends on defence 
      will still be much less than the equivalent expenditure in the United Kingdom 
      and much, much less again than it would be in the United States.

                 These increased forces will make a much greater contribution to 
      the security of South East Asia and, consequently, to the security of
      Australia.   As such, I consider them of vital importance.



•                                ----oGc----

















•

