<!--start metadata-->
Title: Reserve price scheme
Description: press statement
Date: 11/04/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          April 11th, 1965.

                                                                                                                                               RESERVE PRICE SCHEME.

  been reached between the Commonwealth and the Executive of the Last week the Government announced that agreement had 
  Australian Wool Industry Conference concerning the proposed reserve 
  price scheme. The main features of the agreement are these.
                                                              Woolgrowers will contribute by levy a capital fund of 
  £30M. over a period of seven years. The scheme would have ready 
  access to an additional £50M., the arrangements for which are still 
  under negotiation. In addition, the Government has decided that 
  it would guarantee the provision of any further funds that might 
  be necessary beyond the £80M.
                                                              The levy for this scheme for promotion and research 
  would not exceed 3% in any one year.
                                                              To enable the scheme to start before sufficient growers' 
  funds have accumulated the Government would be prepared to make 
  additional advances for the buying of wool.
                                                              The Government and the executive of the Conference
  agreed that the average reserve price should be kept within a 
  conservative range. To this end, certain general objectives,
  guiding principles and standards have been agreed upon between the 
  Government and the Executive.
                                                              An authority would be set up within the framework of the 
  Wool Industry Act to administer the scheme. A reserve price
  authority would be autonomous in regard to the administration of 
  the scheme.
                                                              The scheme would be subject to a complete review within 
  the fifth year of operation.
                                                              Agreement was also reached not to ban private selling 
  at this point of time.
                                                              The Executive of the Wool Industry Conference will now 
  report to the full Conference, and it is hoped that the decision 
  of the Conference will be known before the end of this month. The 
matter would then be put to a referendum of growers.
                                                              In principle this scheme does not differ from that which 
  was proposed by the Executive some months ago, but there are 
  significant, indeed vital differences. The original proposal 
  envisaged a total fund of £80M. Many people have argued that this was 
  quite unrealistic, that unforeseen events could occur which might make 
larger sums necessary for a short period, and that it would be 
  essential if confidence were to be maintained for virtually unlimited 
funds to be available. It could be argued that the larger the total

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .,/2

~
                             —2—

 fund available to the scheme the less money would, in fact, have 
 to be used because buyers and operators in the market would know 
 that the fund would not go bankrupt. The Government has recognised 
 the realism of this argument and thus there is an unlimited
 guarantee although it will obviously be hoped that only limited 
 funds will be required for the scheme.
           In view of the fact that the Government has extended its 
 obligation in quite a remarkable manner I don't think there should 
 be too much concern about an increased obligation from £20M. to 
 £30M. on the part of the woolgrowers themselves.
           Growers will remember that the original proposal con- 
 tained a provision to ban the private selling of wool. On all 
 the advice available to me this would have meant the rejection of the 
 scheme in Western Australia where 50% of the growers are reported to 
 be selling privately. I was told in categoric terms that this was 
 a right they would not give up even to obtain the reserve price
 scheme.
          I could never understand why the Conference and the 
 Executive of the Conference included this in the original proposal 
 knowing the effect on Western Australia as they must have, but I 
 am very glad to see that the Government and the Executive of the 
 Conference have come to the decision that no action will be taken 
 to ban private selling at this point of time. This change will 
 markedly improve the chances of the scheme's adoption by woolgrowers.
          Growers will have many differing reasons for wanting to 
 support the scheme, To my mind there are two reasons which makes 
 support for this scheme not only desirable but a necessity for the 
 wool industry. Wool prices fluctuate up to 30% within a season and 
more than this between seasons. This makes it very difficult, for 
growers to plan their own development on their farms and at the 
 same time it makes it impossible for the textile manufacturers to 
know where they stand in relation to wool. Textile manufacturers 
are becoming thoroughly tired of a raw material whose price fluctuates 
as does the price of wool. This might not have mattered so much 
when these manufacturers had no real alternative. The growth of 
synthetics and the modernization of their equipment has given them 
an alternative they can now use — wool or synthetics, Prices for 
synthetics have been stable for long periods with periodical 
reductions, thus manufacturers have known where they stand. They 
have known that their competitors would have to pay the same price
for raw material. The present auction system for wool almost 
forces manufacturers to be gamblers or speculators in wool. They 
don't want this. This isn't their function, they are manufacturers 
not speculators, Wool's competitive position in this particular
                                                    •./3

k
               -3-

 matter must be improved, It can only be improved by reducing the 
 fluctuations of wool prices.
      If it is argued that a reserve price scheme will not 
 achieve complete stability then this is so but it must be recognised 
 that it will go some way towards achieving this end.
      If it can be recognised that it is necessary to get 
 stability in the price of wool so that we can make wool more 
 attractive for its customers, for the manufacturers, then possible 
 critics of the scheme should ask themselves what else could be done 
 at this point of time. I know of no other proposal that could be 
 introduced at one stroke.
      This proposal deserves supporting. I hope it will
 achieve an overwhelming majority at the A.W.I.C. and at a referendum

