<!--start metadata-->
Title: Nuclear test ban treaty - Malaysia
Description: press statement
Date: 18/08/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                            /8"
          PRESS STATEIvENT:

          MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                     August lgth,l963

                           NUCLEAR TEST BAN TREATY. -      MALAYSIA.

                           During the winter recess two major events have occurred, 
          both of which are of great significance to Australia. The first of these 
          was the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty agreed to and signed by the United States, 
          the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. It is important to understand 
          what this Treaty is and what it is not.

                           It bans the testing of nuclear weapons on the water, in 
          the atmosphere or in outer space, These are the forms of test that
          pollute the earth's atmosphere with radio active fall-out.      Scientific
        - detection is now sufficiently accurate for the United States to know if
          the Russians are breaking this Treaty or for the Russians to know if the 
          United States are breaking it without having observers on the spot. The 
          Treaty does not ban underground tests. These do not involve radio active 
          fall-out. Underground tests were excluded because it was not possible to 
          identify them from minor earthquakes without having on site inspections. 
          The Soviet Union was not willing to accept on site inspections at this 
          stage.

                           Either country can withdraw from the Treaty under a major
          threat to its security.     This is probably meant to cover the case in which 
          one party breaks the Treaty in some way or another,

                           While in force this Treaty will effectively prevent the 
          pollution of the atmosphere by nuclear explosions undertaken by the two 
          great powers, More important than this, it is the first time that the 
          United States) the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union have been able to 
          agree on a major event that contributes to world peade. Thus, this 
          Nuclear Test Ban Treaty should be regarded as a stepping-stone from which 
          the great powers will try and do something further to lessen world tensions. 
          This is essential because the Test Ban Treaty does not destroy stockpiles 
          Of atomic nuclear weapons, Ít does nothing to reduce the tremendous size 
          of conventional arms, Ín itself it does nothing to solve the ideological
          problems and difficulties that lie between the East and the West.      In 
          addition, it should be recalled that this Treaty is not binding on other 
          countries. France, seeking an independent nuclear deterrent of her own 
          and Communist China, have both condemned this Treaty for differing reasons. 
          That is because they are both determined to become nuclear powers.
•                          Apart from the three negotiators - the United Kingdom, the 
          United States and Soviet Russia - Australia has been the first country to 
          add her signature to the Treaty. This shows the importance with which 
          the Australian Government regards this whole question.

                           The Treaty is available for signature by any country 
          wishing to keep to its terms. I understand 104 countries have indicated 
          support for the Treaty so far.

                           There is no doubt that the main event which has moved 
          Russia to come to this agreement with the Western countries has been the 
          growing bitterness of the Soviet's quarrel with Communist China. It is 
          important for us to understand the nature of this quarrel. The Soviet 
          Union has, to all intents, given up the doctrine of the inevitability of 
          war. Originally, the Communist doctrine held that war between the 
          Communist countries and the democracies would one day be inevitable before 
          Communism ruled the world. The Soviet Union now realises that too much 
          is at stake -that her civilization and standard of life would be destroyed
          by another war as would the West's.      Therefore, under Mir. Krushchev, the 
          Soviet Union has come to adopt the view that the Soviet Union can overcome


                                                                                /2.

         the West, using all means short of war. This includes using trade as a 
         political weapon and subversion. However, from the West's point of view,
         this is a situation that can be dealt with.  The Communist Chinese have 
         always condemned this change in the Russian attitude. They still say 
         that war with the Western countries, with the democracies, is inevitable 
         and that the Communists will win such a war. The Chinese may be clinging 
         to this belief because even though they might lose over 300 million people 
         in such a war they would have over 300 million left. Indeed, a third 
         world war conduc+ed in nuclear terms could make the Chinese the inheritors 
         of the earth. It is to the West's advantage that this argument between 
         the Russians and the Chinese continue, not only because it tends to drive 
         a wedge between these two great Communist powers, but also because it
         divides Communist parties right round the world.  Th resignations from 
         the Australian Communist Party that you will have seen reported in the 
         press a couple of months ago had their cause in this conflict between the 
         Russians and the Chinese.

                          However, no matter what the cause and what the reason, 
         the West should welcome every move by the Russians which makes it possible 
         to reach some agreement and thus reduce world tensions. The Nuclear 
         Test Ban Treaty is a first step - in itself a small one - but if a little 
         understanding and trust between the major powers result from this agree- 
•        ment, then other more positive steps towards more permanent peace may 
         follow.

                                    MALAYS IA


                          The other event which occurred and in which Australia is 
         vitally interested concerns the formation of the new Malaysia. You will 
         recall from the press reports that agreement was finally reached in Great 
         Britain between Malaya, Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo over the terms 
         of the new Federation of Malaysia. It is important to understand that 
         the reason for this Federation is to weld these small countries together 
         into a stronger Federation so that they may develop more rapidly and lead 
         to a greater measure of security in this region.

                          For various reasons, earlier this year Indonesia's President 
         spoke out very strongly against Malaysia. There were then discussions and 
         extreme diplomatic activity which seemed to reduce the tension for a while, 
         and it seemed as though Malaysia would be launched on the due date, August 
         31st, without further opposition from her giant neighbour Indonesia.
         However, these hopes were short-lived. Shortly after the final agreement 
         had been announced between Britain, Malaya, Singapore and the present 
         colonies of Sarawak and North Borneo, President Soekarno renewed his attack 
         on Malaysia, accused the Tunku of breaking his word, and said that Indonesia
         would conduct her confrontation policy with vigour. Incidentally, this 
         word "confrontation" is a useful one because nobody knows what it means. 
         A conference was scheduled between the Prime Minister of Malaya, Tunku 
         Abudl Rahman, President Soekarno of Indonesia and the Prime Minister of
         the Philippines.   The three leaders attended this conference. As a 
         result, we have some kind of hazy agreement under which it appears that 
         Tunku Abud.l Rahman has agreed to allow the United Nations to test public 
         opinion in Sarawak and North Borneo before Malaysia is launched. There 
         also seem to have been far-reaching agreements concerning possible con- 
         federation of the whole region. It is difficult to see what the effect of 
         these will ultimately be.

                          If the agreement about United Nations' assessment of 
         public opinion is undertaken quickly and if Malaysia is formed quickly
         thereafter, then no great harm may have been done.  However, if the 
         delay caused by this assessment gives rise to further delaying or confron- 
         tation tactics by Indonesia, it may well bode ill for Malaysia and for the 
         whole region.
                                                                         /3

                                      -- 3 -
                        As I have said, quite frankly, I have had some sympathy 
        for Indonesia over the West Nev Guinea issue because of past history and
        because of the behaviour of the Dutch., I have no sympathy, however, 
        for any moves that might cause delay in the Níalaysian Federation and it 
        Would be a tragedy for the stability of the whole region and for Australia 
        if this is allowed to occur.







                                        o 0o



~

