<!--start metadata-->
Title: Royal visit, Order of the Thistle, Indonesia-Malaysia
Description: press statement
Date: 31/03/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   P.R- ~S ST::TE.ZNTs

   IVALCOLN FRASER
                                March 31st, 1963


         During the summer Parliamentary recess, which was extended 
   long past the usual time because of the Queenis visit to Australia, we have 
   witnessed some events which have been-exciting and others which have caused 
   a deep impression on the average Australian and which have brought us an 
   acute awareness that our particular part of the world need not be immune 
   from international rivalries.


                  ROYAL VISIT


         The Queents visit has been an unqualified success and I think 
   everyone has been impressed by the comparative informality of this recent 
   Royal Tour. I say comparative because no Royal Tour can really be informal 
   in the Australian sense. However, the Queen has met a great number of 
   people and has impressed them with her graciousness. The Duke of Edinburgh 
   will always find a welcome place in Australian hearts because of his easy 
   going manner and his ready ability to swap jokes with the people he meets.
110 Many examples of this could be quoted but I would like to mention one. 
   During a reception in Canberra Senator Buttfield, who is a lady, and Fir. 
   Buttfield were being presented to the Queen and the Duke. After Senator 
   Buttfield had been presented, Mr. Buttfield followed, and quick as a flash 
   the Duke said to him, or so it is reported, "fit looks as if you have got the 
   same sort of job as I have - how do you like it?" The story doesn1t relate 
   Mr. Buttfieldts reply.

         The recent Royal Tour was marked by two innovations. The 
   Australian Parliaments did not meet while the Queen was here and this meant 
   a wider cirèle of people could meet Her Majesty. If the Parliaments were 
   opened by Her Majesty she would have to as custom demands, give the Address 
   opening the Parliament and then the normal Parliamentary functions would 
   follow: to these circumstances the numbers who meet the Queen are pretty 
   strictly proscribed. By keeping the Parliaments closed a wider number of 
   people froth different walks of life have been able to get a better opportunity 
   to meet and see the Royal couple.

         The second innovation was the use by the Queen of the Royal Yacht 
~  Britannia during her visita This must have made the tour a mach easier one 
   for the Royal couple. The Britannia has been their home during the tour, 
   their base from which they could branch out and make their visits to the 
   Capital cities. With previous Royal Tours the Queen would usually stay 
   at Government House in Canberra or the Government House in the different 
   States or, occasionally, in other private homes. Under'these circumstances 
   the Queen would have no base and every roof under which she would sleep would 
   be a stranger's roof. In these circumstances the Tour would bot:Inuch more 
   difficult for the Queen and the Prince than was actually the case.





                   -- o000o---

                     2
                               March 31st,1963


                ORDER OF THE THISTLE

         I think political friends and foes alike have all unani- 
   mously agreed that the granting of the Order of the Thistle to the Prime 
   Minister has been a well deserved honour. It is well known that most 
   Australian honours conferred by the Queen are made on the recommendation 
   of the Prime Minister or of the Premiers of the different States. The 
   Prime Minister has, in the past I believe, always had a certain pride in 
   being plain "Bob Menzies", and I am quite certain he, himself, would never
410 have done anything to alter these particular circumstances. However, this 
   very high honour was conferred without any prior knowledge to himself and 
   solely on the wish of the Queens I am told that one morning he received 
   a summons to the Queen and Whed he appeared he was told Her Majesty had 
   brought something from Scotland for him. This particular honour can only 
   be conferred on the wish of the Queen - it is not an honour which any other 
   person can suggest the Queen should confer on any one and, apart from the 
   Royal family, there are never more than sixteen people privileged to wear 
   the Order of the Thistle at any one time.
         While this is a great honour for the Prime Minister, whom we
410sometimes forget was a State School student at Jeparit, who educated himself 
   entirely by scholarships, it is also an honour for this country and gives 
   some recognition of the status with which Australia is held overseas and 
   particularly in the United Kingdom. It was also a nice touch the way the 
   announcement of the honour was made. Royal honours conferred on citizens 
   of the Queen usually appear in the New Year Honours list or the Birthday 
   Honours list, but this was a personal gift from the Queen, announced by the 
   Queen personally to the Prime Minister. It is a fitting reminder of the 
   Queen's visit to Australia.


                    o0o

                            j

                     I ND OTES IA - MA LAYS IA


            While the Royal Tour has taken up much of our attention in
     recent weeks we have also had one eye turned northwards to the clouds which 
     are possibly gathering on the not so distant horizon. The United Kingdom, 
     Australia and her other Allies all support the Malaysia Federation. Some 
     of the Colonies which are at the moment tied to the United Kingdom and which 
     all form part of Malaysia are so small that they could never survive as 
     independent States unless they joined in some wider Federation, and this is 
     one of the reasons for the whole Malaysia idea. The proposal has the 
     strong support of the United Kingdom and of the Malayan Government and of 
     the Singapore Government. It is going to be an accomplished fact later 
     this year - I think on October 1st.

            The difficulties over this proposal have arieen because both the 
     Phillipines and Indonesia have voiced objection to the Malaysian idea. 
     Coming as this did shortly after the West New Guinea affair there will be 
     some Australians who have been all too ready to say that this is another 
     example of Indonesian Imperialism. While history may record that this is 
     the position I don't believe that this is the real ground for Phillipine
     and Indonesian Opposition. It has been a task of Australian diplomacy 
410  and of Sir Garfield Barwick in particular to try and show that their 
     objection to the Malaysian idea has no real substance, but very often in 
     matters of this kind it is not a question of what is fact, it is a question 
     of what people believe to be fact.

            Severs. questions are at the base of Phillipine and Indonesian 
     opposition to Malaysia. There is the relationship between the President 
     of Indonesia and the Prime Minister of Malaya both of whom have said quite 
     undiplomatic things about the other. The exchanges between these leaders, 
     spoken from a distance have done nothing to calm the atmosphere between 
     the two countries.

            Perhaps the most realistic objection of the Phillipines and of 
     the Indonesians is their fear that the Chinese population in the new 
     Malaysia will become the most powerful group. Both the Phillipines and 
     Indonesia dislike and fear the Chinese. Despite a strong Communist party 
     in Indonesia the Chinese in that country are, to some extent, a persecuted 
     race; they have been told to live in the towns; they have lost their 
     trading businesses in different parts of the country and the Indonesians 
     have no love for them. The Chinese breed much quicker than the Malayans 
     and could clearly quite soon have a numerical superiority in the new 
     Malaysia. The Indonesians may fear the Chinese in this area will gain 
     a preponderance of political power.

           These fears may be unrealistic but it is easy to see that this 
     situation involves difficulties for Australia. We have got to learn to 
    understand the Indonesians and to co-operate together for the advancement 
     of the whole area if it is humanly possible. On the other hand, Malaya 
     is a member of the Commonwealth supported by Britain. In the development 
     of the Ma.laysian Federation we don't want to have to choose between one 
     or the other and I am certain all our powers of diplomacy will be directed 
    towards the smooth launching of Malaysia in October.

           The long term interests of Australia and of the whole region 
    will be best served if Indonesia and the Phillipines come to realise 
    that their opposition to Malaysia is contrary to their own national 
    interest and to the general progress of south-east Asia,


                           o0o

