<!--start metadata-->
Title: Petrol tax
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 26/05/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                         3EA   26th May, 1957.
                                         3YB   29th may, 1957.
                       ?HOWL TAX
              Malcol„ Fraser, Member for   on.

       Lest week I spoke of road problems and of the difficulty in 
getting the formula ohanged just to suit Victoria. I said the real 
problem was one of money, not planning, and it is on the problem of 
mony that I want to write today.
       A recent survey has shown that over the next ten yearsthe 
cash shortage for new work on primary roads throughout Australia will
be MOW. Shortage in Lew south Wales is greatestat £1.6    Queensland
next at bier., then Victoria at MM.    This ahortage would be mach ,
greater if the vital needs of local governments were taken into account.
       The campaign should concentrate on money, not on the formule. 
Petrol tax should be forgotten and money should come from Consolidated 
Revenue on a basis of needs, taking into account the present condition 
of roads, the degree of self help end the traffic density of each State. 
These are chiefly the elements that had no part in the original formula 
They are ones that should help the highly developed ares$ such as 
Victoria.
       Petrol Tex should be forgotten us a means of financing roods 
and, if ssible, it should be radically reduced, the reasonibr this 
being that good roads benefit the whole compunity by lowering transport 
coats. This could be significant inkeeping overseas markets with
clear advantage to the Nation.
       If the whole nation benefits then the nation should make
e contribution to roads through general revenue while road users pay 
a fair wear and tear through rag/titration fees.
       At the moment, the petrol user as opposed to the road user pays 
an entirely disproportionate share of road costs. Thieves not always 
so but ove recent years the use of petrol on farms and properties has 
increased maw times. 14,000 petrol Ferguson tractors contribute 
half a million in k'etrol Tax for Victoria alone. Super spreading 
500,000 tons on 4 million sores, hey making and countless other jobs
require enormous quantities of petrol. Petrol that is consumed on 
the farm and unrelated to road needs. The fishermen, too:has always 
suffered under this tax. If diesel fuel must be exempt trou tax 
because of the cost loading in industry, then etrol Tax should be

  lowered because of the coat loading on the primary producer.
 Coloured fixer-with one colour exempt is no answer , it would merely 
 lead to evasion and policing difficulties.
           Furthermore, even if at the present time all Petrol Tax
 went to roads, there would be still a shortage of cash. The
 Federal Government keeps 216M. for general revenue while the shortage 
 for primary road requirements is said to be MM. a year. From
 these figures it is clear that unless the source of road funds is
 altered, a grave injustice on all primary producers will be perpetuated. 
           o sum p-
            1. Go for a greater cum of money for a . , ust ral ie . 
                 Wage a campaign that will *amend the support 
                 of other States.
                Forget l'etrol Tax because of its injustice to 
                 primary iroducers and because the nation should
                 make a contribution to roads through general 
                 revenue.
                Work for a new fermis, e, taki g into account .modern 
                 development and progress but don't push this to
                 the extent that we antagonism ogler States, Show 
                 that we are out to help Australia, not just our- 
                 selves. If we do this, an up-to-date formula
                 could well sneak in on the tail of a new deal for 
                roads.



2ü/5/195?.

