<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr Calwell and Mr Whitlam
Description: press statement
Date: 26/08/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEIENT:

NALCOLM FRASER:

                                                  August 26th, 1962


                     MR; CALNELL AND MR. WHITLAM


            It is very bAd luck that Arthur Calwell became sick just before 
this Budget session of Parliament. There is no doubt that he came out of 
the last election with a greatly improved stature with his own Party and with 
Australians. It is now 4 matter of history that all forecasts made by so-
called experts were proved wrong.  The Government had expected to lose some 
seats but still to have a reasonably comfortable majority. As we in Canberra 
know only too uncomforta1/4y, our majority is one. The fact that the 
Australian Labour Party had made such a dent in the Government's majority 
was, in large measure, due to Arthur Calwell. For this reason in particular 
it is very bad luck indeed for him to be absent from the Parliament for the 
first Budget session since the election.

            At the end of the last Parliament, the Prime Minister announced 
that the Government would.make it possible for leading members of the 
Australian Labour Party tó go abroad to examine at first hand the problems
raised by the European Economic Community. Several Labour Members, 
including Gough Whitlam, the Deputy Leader, took advantage of this offer and 
Mr, Whitlam showed that he had not wasted his time when he had been abroad 
when he spoke on the Common Market debate in the Parliament. Arthur Calwell 
did not go abroad in the winter recess because he had delayed acceptance of 
the Government's offer until September when it was felt that overseas 
authorities in_the different countries might be able to give him a fuller 
and more complete picture of the situation. The Leader of the Opposition's 
illness therefore will be doubly unfortunate if he is not able to go abroad 
in September and take advantage of the Government's offer. I know quite 
well that he would make full use of the opportunity and would come back to 
Australia with a keen appreciation of the problems that may concern this 
country if Britain joins the Common Market.

                    MR. WHITLAM AND THE COMMON NARJET

            If Mr. Calwell's illness has been unfortunate for him there is 
no doubt that it has given Gough Whitlam an opportunity to reply on behalf 
of the Opposition in major debates in a way that he would not have been able 
to if his Leader had been present. It has also given him an opportunity to 
see how he can control Caucus affairs in his Leader's absence. I think most 
fair-minded observers would agree that Mr. Whitlam has not wasted his
opportunities.   On the Common Market he made a thoughtful and, most people
would certainly say, a constructive speech. Mr. Whitlam pointed out that,
in his opinion, the maximum that Alistralia might lose if Britainoined the 
Common Market would be £l4OM. worth of trade in each year. He did not 
mention a figure but he went on to examine Australia's products one by one. 
H e made the point which I don't think has previously received much publicity 
that the same piece of land in one of the Common Market countries cannot, 
at the same time, be used for meat, wheat and butter production. European 
countries have not got anything like the unused land, or undeveloped land 
may be a more proper term, that we have in Australia. Their ability to 
expand their total volume of agricultural products is therefore limited to 
the benefits that they can gain from better techniques.

            Since European agriculture has been very highly protected for 
the last 20 years there has been a very strong incentive for European farmers 
to expand their output very greatly. If I understand the Deputy Leader 
correctly he would, I think, believe that there is not a great possibility




                                                                / 2.

                                                                  2



    for a quickly expanded production in Europe. Europe might be able to increase 
    butter production but this could be at the expense of meat production. It 
    might be able to increase meat. This, in turn, might have to be at the 
    expense of wheat or grains. Undoubtedly there will always be some room for an
    overall 4xpansion of European production.                                    I don't think that expansion, 
    however, would be tremendous. What eouid affect us much more than expansion 
    in production is a contraction of demand. For example, our butter sells or 
    the British market for about 300/- stg. a cwt. - or under 3/- stg. per lb.
    The price in Europe might average more than double thie                                            If Britain joins 
    the Coiamon Market, and if the European price became the British price, 
    consumption of butter would plainly fall very heavily and this would affect
    us and it would affect New Zealand.                              However, I have said on other occasions 
    that because butter is so important to New Zealand, I believe some world wide 
    agreement will be reached in regarà t., it. Certainly, if the dairy industry 
    is to be affected in Australia 07 if any other industry is to be affected in 
    Australia, the industry itself should not have to carry the cost of adjustment 
    to the new conditions. The whole corruriunity should bear the cost of any 
    re-adjustment that migil, be ne asaary. In case you think I am still quoting 
    the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the last thoughts are my own. •


                                                 Nd. WHITIAM AND THE BUDGET

                Mr. Whitlam's second major opportunity came in the Budget debate. The 
    Leader of the Opposition traditionally answers for the Opposition in a matter 
   as important as.this and so, with Mr,. Calwellts absence, it was a great 
   opportunity to show what he could uo. Again, I think I must say that most 
   fair-minded observers would think he took good use of his opportunity.- I have 
   just finished reading his speech for a second time and there is no doubt he 
   put a great deal of thought and hard work into it. However, being politicians, 
   he being one and I being another, I do not think he would expect me to agree
  with every thought that he expressed.                                The Deputy Leader seemed to centre 
  his attack on the fact that unemployment is still too high in Australia. He 
  would not have found any Government speaker to disagree with him so far as 
  this is concerned. It is, I think, worth while seeing how some people outside
  of politics look at this matter.


                In January of last year, Mr. Albert Monk prepared a Paper for the
  Australian Citizenship Conven ;jon.                               1m. Monk is .1=resi;.:ent of the Australasian
  Council of Trade Unions.                       One paragraph of Mr. Monk's paper read like this: 
  "Australia should not panic-over a minor percentage of unemployment. In 
  America today there are about five million people unemployed or about 6% of 
  the total work force. In Canada the present unemployed figure is 8% and it 
  will go up to 10% by the end of March.. We have been very fortunate. When 
  I tell people overseas that our unemployment figure is about lob% or less 
  than 2%" (at the moment it is 2.l%)"they say thàt that is net a problem at all. 
  They are used to having economic problems with a ratio of unemployment to the 
  work force of about 4% or 5%. The ordinary oerso in Australia now gets
• awfully frightened if we get up to 22. ul:e: loyment whereas, in actual fact, 
  because of seasonal occupations in Aust n Lia; it is necessary to have about 
  1.5% floating work force to deal with e , , rn.al and major construction works."

               That's the end of the quotation -rom Nr, conk.

               Now, I have already admitted that the present level of unemployment at 
  2.1% is higher than the rate of 1.8 and 2.0% which Mr. Monk quoted, but the 
  difference is not all that great and the Government's Budget stimulus of just 
  under £12CM. should surely do much to bring this figure down.


               There is one sentence in Mr. Monk's statement that I would like to 
  emphasise. He said that the ordinary person in Australia now gets awfully 
 frightened if we get up to 2% unemployment. I think that this is a key 
 sentence which explains a great deal of the present difficulty. It is well 
 known that the recovery has not proceeded as quickly as the Government hop




                                                                                                                   /3,

                                3

or as quickly as the Government expected. There are three main reasons for
this.   I state them not necessarily in their order of importance. There 
is no doubt that business interests have become timid because of assertions 
made by many people of what the United Kingdom's entr.7 into the Common Market 
might do to Australian trade. For example, we have had statements by the 
Chamber of Manufactures that the manufacturing industries of Australia would 
be more seriously hit than any other if Britain joined the Common Market. 
Since manufacturing industries' exports to the United Kingdom or Europe are 
negligible, I cannot see how they come to this conclusion. Nevertheless, 
statements of this kind make businessmen timid about the future. They 
cease to plan with the confidence with which they had planned in the past. 
Secondly, many companies are now finding they are able to get as much work 
done with a smaller staff. They have been able to organise their own 
processes more efficiently. I have been told that one large concern with 
an administrative and advertising staff of up to 8,000 has been able to 
re-organise its business and finds itself in a position to accomplish a 
greater amount of work with a staff of 6,000. This is a tremendous reduction 
and if an industry was in such a position, obviously it had a good deal of 
fat on its bones, which would not hava been doing the industry itself much 
good. The fact that many firms have been in this same position has meant 
that employment has not increased as rapidly as production has increased.

             The third reason - that employment has dragged and not improved 
as rapidly as we would like - is due to the fact that demand itself has not 
increased or recovered in 841 fields as much as the Government though'. it
would. I believe there is a very good reason for this. The shock of 
November, 1960, caused many individuals to pause and look at their own family 
budgeting. Since then, Savings Bank deposits and money on fixed deposit 
with the Trading Banks has risen by many tens of millions of pounds. The 
increase since November, 1960 has been greater proportionately than the
increase before that time.  This seems to indicate that people are saving 
more than they used to and spending a little less than they used to, and if 
you get a great number of people doing this, if you get a change in the 
attitude of the whole people then, quite clearly, this affects the demands 
for goods and services.

             The recent Budget deficit of just under £120M. is designed to 
speed up recovery and to counter these three factors that I have just mentioned. 
The future will show whether the Government's judgment is correct.

