<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 1/04/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT:
MALCOLM FRASER:                                       April is t,19ó2


             Before Parliament met this year, as you know, the Commonwealth 
had talks with all sections of industry and with the States to consider 
various measures that would re-vitalise the economy. The Commonwealth's 
main concern was to restore a certain lack of confidence in secondary 
industry and, in particular, to reduce the unemployment level to a figure 
that is much more in accord with modern thinking.

             For this reason, the measures which the Commonwealth finally 
adopted were designed to increase employment in those areas where the 
quickest results could be shown or, secondly, in those industries which 
had been most severely affected.

             Although I have spoken of this before, as you will see in a 
moment, I have a particular reason for recapitulating, to a certain extent.

             The Commonwealth decided to make a special non-repayable grant
available to the States totalling £10M.  This was designed for short term 
public works which could be put in train quickly. £7-N. was going to the 
Commonwealth-States housing program and £72M. to semi-government and local 
governing authority programs of over £100,000. In addition, local governing 
authorities with programs of under £100,000 would have authority to borrow 
up to an additional £100,000 in the remainder of this year if they could 
fill the loan.

             These four fields of Government activity were chosen because 
it was felt that they could have a quick impact on employment.

             In addition to these measures, it must be remembered that 
sales tax on cars has been reduced. There has been a flat reduction in 
income tax of 5% for the full year, all of which will be taken off in the 
last four months cf this year.

             There was another measure which has not received much publicity. 
For some time, the number of migrants that Victoria has received has been 
over-emphasising the population of this State. These mistakes were revealed 
in the census of last winter. However, the tax reimbursements from the 
Commonwealth to the States were decided on Victoria's estimated population. 
When the results of the census became known, it was clear that this was 
going to lead to an overpayment to Victoria of over £1M. a year. However, 
since the State Budget was based on the estimated population and as the 
amount of finance that the State thought it was going to get, the Common- 
wealth has passed special legislation so that Victoria will not lose as a 
result of her population being less than she thought it was. The amount 
of money concerned is over £lM. Llterations have been made to the formula 
so that Victoria will not suffer in the remaining years of the present
financial agreement with the Commonwealth. One might have thought that this 
would indicate a generous attitude on behalf of the Commonwealth.

             The statement issued by the Commonwealth after these arrange- 
ments were made said that the States regarded this offer to the Commonwealth 
as eminently fair. I think any of us would if we found we were going to 
get £iN. a year more than we were strictly entitled to, and that is what 
has happened to Victoria. However, when the Premier made his statement to 
the Victorian Parliament, even though he had been present at all the talks 
with the Commonwealth, he said that he could not understand the system 
under which the Commonwealth had split up its special grant to the States. 
A mention was made of "Rafferty's Rules" and most disp araging and ungenerous 
comments were made concluding with the statement that since this is a 
non-repayable grant, it is the Commonwealth's business as to how they do it.




                                                            /2.

                            -2 —



            But the reasons were known for the Commonwealthts actions 
Th9 Commonwealth wanted the greatest impact to be made in those States 
which were suffering the highest degree of unemployment. While the 
unemployment figure in Victoria was 2.5%, in Queensland it was 5%; in
Tasmania it was 4%. It was for this reason that both Queensland and 
Tasmania received a slightly 'arger share of the non—repayable grant 
than they would have done if it had been broken up strictly in accordance 
with normal procedures.

            I think most people would have regarded this as fair. But 
th#re are other aspects of the program which should be taken into account. 
Since a great part of Australiats population is in Victoria the income tax 
rebate will have a much greater effect in Victoria than it will in Queensland. 
In addition, since a large part of the motor industry is found in Victoria, 
the reduction in sales tax on motor cars would have a greater effect in 
Victoria on employment than in other States. Since the Commonwealtrts 
efforts were designed to improve the employment levels in all States, it was 
clear that something would have to be done to balance the position from the 
point of view of those States that did not receive as much benefit from
these proposals. For this reason the special non—repayable grant was
divided in the way it was. The additional moneys coming to Victoria, 
including the non—repayable grant, the housing program, and the semi— ' 
government and local government authoritiesT aid, total over £61%,1. Since 
this is all available in the last 4 months of the year it is a much bigger 
amount than one might have thought. It is, of course, natural for
Premiers when they leave the Conference at Canberra to say that their 
particular State has suffered by comparison with other States. Premiers, 
perhaps, have to talk in this way to show that they are fighting for their 
own State as opposed to other States, but when the Commonwealth feels and, 
I think, justly, that it has gone out of its way to be in some degree 
generous in special circumstances, it would be more pleasing if, for a 
change, this could be recognised,

