<!--start metadata-->
Title: Colombo Plan
Description: press statement
Date: 14/05/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                 /0
        PRESS STATETJ.ENT:                                       May 14th,1961
        ÔALCOLM FRASER:
                                      COLOMBO PIAN
                        Last week, a photographic display in the King's Hall of
        Parliament House marked the 10th Anniversary of the Colombo Plan. As you can
        imagine, this display showed pictures of progress in the various South East
        Asian countries that was related to the Colombo Plan.
                        I have never yet heard a single Australian criticise the
        concept of the Colombo Plan or what this country does in relation to it. Rather,
        if there has been criticism, the criticism has been that we do not do enough.
                        Over the 10 years of the Plan Australia, for its part, has
        spent about £ 36M - £37M. This money is spent in the training of various
        Asian students who come to this country, through the provision of technical
4-s     advice , equipment, or by way of capital aid.
                        Since the Plan began, over. 3,000 awards for training in Australia
        have been granted Asian students. At the end of last year nearly 900 were 
        still in Australia completing their courses. The main fields of study include 
        engineering, education, public administration, nursing, agriculture, medicine
        and health.    These subjects are all strictly related to the needs of a 
        developing Asian economy. The cost of this part of the program has been about £5M.
                        One might have expected, after the beginning of the Colombo 
        plan, that private Asian students in Australia would diminish and that students 
4.+     would try to get free training under the Colombo Plan. This has not been the 
        case. Indeed, there is quite a lot of evidence to show that Australia's 
        contribution under the Calolibo Plan has stimulated other Asians to come here on 
        their own initiative.
                        In 1952, there were about 2,300 private Asian students in 
        Australia. By June, 1960, there were 8,000.
                        Technical assistance provided by Australia has taken two 
        other forms including the loan of experts for advisory and structural programs 
        overseas. Officers have studied abroad for as long as 6 years on assignments 
        under this aspect of the scheme. Also, Australia has supplied publications and 
        equipment for research and teaching purposes.
                        In the first 10 years, a total of over 400 experts have been 
        sent abroad at the request of Asian countries at a cost of about £1,300,000. At 
        the end of last year, 61 of these officers were still actively engaged in the 
        field. The majority have gone to Indonesia, Malaya, Vietnam, Sarawak, North

               2 -

Borneo and Singapore. Other officers have gone to various Asian
countries advising on the needs of those countries.
        Despite these most important aspects of the Colombo Plan
aid which, perhaps, earn greater goodwill than any other, the greater
part of Australia's expenditure under the Plan is concerned with capital
aid. Under this, the provision of heavy equipment for development
projects in Asian countries or gifts of commodities such as whaat, flour,
fertiliser and copper are provided. More than 50 projects in 12 member
countries have received Australian capital aid at a total cost of over
£28E. The projects assisted by Australia cover the irrigation and
preparation of land for crops in Ceylon and Pakistan and Indonesia.
The provision of electric power in India. Secondary industries in
Burma. Municipal services in Cambodia and Pakistan and Vietnam. Transport
communications and broadcasting in India and Indonesia, Pakistan and Malaya
and Cambodia, and thermal power in Thailand.
        I think, in this week, it is particularly appropriate
that we remind ourselves of what the Colombo Plan has achieved and is achieving
because, in the Month of May, a great number of Apex Branches throughout
Australia are celebrating their International Week. In this Week, many
Apex Branches obtain a speaker from overseas representatives in this
country. For example, in Western Victoria, the Ambassador from Thailand
and the Indian Acting High Commissioner will be visiting various Apex
Branches, and others are visiting other Branches throughout Australia.
This serves to give Australians a knowledge of South East Asian countries
which they would not otherwise have. It is a most valuable means of
communication to the Australian public on a personal basis, and I know
that diplomats in Canberra welcome the opportunity of speaking to
Australian audiences in this way, especially audiences brought together
by Associations such as Apex which have, in the past, displayed a wide-
spread interest and awareness of the importance of our position in
South East Asia.
        Athough it is important it should not be felt that the
Colombo Plan is the major factor in the development of the South East
Asian countries. The task confronting such countries as India and

                               ó 3

Indonesia is quite fantastic and quite beyond our comprehension unless
we have made a study of it. The pressure .:f population creates 
difficulties in having enough food for the extra mouths, quite apart from 
raising the standards of life of the average Indian or Indonesian. 
Nevertheless, this is the objective of these Governments and it is an 
objective that is being pursued with success. The task is formidable and 
it will take a long time.
                The Colombo Plan is most useful because it can supplement 
the resources of those countries to prevent bottlenecks, and to provide 
technical assistance, education facilities and capital equipment that 
is not available to the countries themselves. In this way, it is hoped 
that the Colombo Plan enables Asian countries to pursue their own 
development program more ably, more quickly and more successfully than they 
would have done without this program.

