<!--start metadata-->
Title: Northern Australia
Description: press statement
Date: 8/10/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PRESS STATEMENT                                                   .Z42
                                                               October 8th,1961

                          Last week I spoke about the development of Northern 
              Australia and especially about the Kimberleys. Even though there 
              are still research problems preventing the greater agricultural 
              development of these areas there are other aspects of development 
              in the north that can go ahead and that are going ahead now.
                           There are many areas in Northern Australia which have 
              not been able to develop to the full purely because of lack of
              transport.     The local state Governments have not had the resources 
              and the value of production from the areas has not justified a large
              expenditure by the State Governments.    However, the Commonwealth 
              has recognised that expenditure on certain beef roads is justified 
              and even demanded from a national point of view because of the 
              importance of increasing exports.
                           The beef industry in the north of Australia is one of 
              the industries which we hope will make a greater contribution to 
              exports in the coming years. For this reason the Commonwealth has 
•             agreed to make quite large grants available for special roads in 
              Queensland, the Northern Territory and Western Australia. For 
              example, in queensland X650,000 of Commonwealth money will be spent 
              on a road between Julia Creek and Ormanton. The Commonwealth has 
              also indicated that it is prepared to spend in (ueensiand, over the 
              next few years, additional sums which will total about £5 million. 
              One of the roads that will almost certainly be built under this 
              finance will be a good road from Boulia to Dajarra or Mt.Isa.
                           In the Northern Territory L350,000 has been allocated
              for the improvement of beef cattle roads this year. In Western 
              Australia half a million pounds will be made available for roads 
              in the mast Kimberleys. This road will be constructed between 
              Wyndham and Nicholson and between Wyndham and Turkey Creek and
•             Halls Creek.   On these last roads major bridges will have to be 
              built over the Ord at Bandicoot Bar and over the Dunham River.
                           These roads will have a dual purpose - in the first 
              instance, they will enable beef to get to market in better condition. 
              Instead of having to walk sometimes hundreds of miles, cattle will 
              now be able to be loaded direct on to road transports from many 
              areas and taken to the railhead or the market. They will thus be
              slaughtered in much better condition.  Secondly, these roads will
              make it possible to move beef from drought stricken areas. In the 
              past, landholders in the north have generally held their cattle in 
              times of drought hoping that rain would come. Generally, as a last 
              move, in desperation they would try to walk the cattle out much too 
              late. They would find they were either too weak to travel or the 
              waterholes along the cattle route would be dried up, thus making 
              driving quite impossible.
                           Modern allweather beef roads, such as the ones I have 
              mentioned, will make it possible to make much better use of available 
              pasture and should avoid heavy losses in time of drought. This 
              second purpose should be most beneficial to the Channel country of

                                         2
           southwest Queensland which the Boulia - Mt.Isa road would serve.
           This area possesses some of the best fattening land in Australia after 
           rain or after floods which should come down the northern rivers. 
           However, the Channel country is notoriously prone to drought and, when 
           this occurs, the area might be useless for two or three years at a time. 
           It has been estimates that, over a ten year period, the construction 
           of these and other beef roads will add directly í22M, a year to our 
           export income.
                      Over the last two or three years another notable contribution 
           has been made to the reduction of Australia's transport costs. Several 
           years ago Bill Wentworth formed the Government Members' Rail 
           Standardization Committee. This Committee tabled a report in the 
           Parliament and much of the report has since been adopted by the Govern- 
           ment. As a result, we see the rail standardization is being carried 
           out between Melbourne and Albury. This will make fast and efficient 
           rail transport between Melbourne and Sydney possible for the first time
           in history.   In addition, the line between Mt.Isa and Townsville 
           is being rebuilt to enable the proper expansion of the Mt.Isa Mines 
•          to take place. However, the most significant move in standardization 
           is taking place in W.A. where at a cost of over £40M. the Kalgoorlie- 
           iremantle line is being rebuilt on the standard gauge.
                      As a result of this, a steel industry will be built at 
           Kwinana at a further cost of )45M. and many other industries are 
           almost certain to follow as a direct result of this Government decision 
           to standardize this line. This will open up a real industrial future 
           for Western Australia for the first time.
                      The efforts in rail standardization and in the construction 
           of beef roads are notable advances and will make a real contribution 
           to the overall development of Australia.
                      Victorians might think that most of this development is 
•          being undertaken outside their own State and in this, except for the 
           Melbourne-Albury rail standardization which is important, they would 
           be correct. However, as Australians, Victorians should be glad that 
           these important developmental projects are being undertaken in areas 
           that very badly need development and Government assistance. Most of 
           the areas that will benefit by these beef roads or by the rail standard- 
           ization moves, are areas that require extensive Government activity
           before real development can take place. The works required have, for 
           60 years, been beyond the capacity of the States concerned and that 
           is why the Commonwealth has offered the greater part of the finance
           for these projects.  As they are completed, these different works 
           will add significantly to Australia's overseas income.

