<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth grants for science facilities in both state and independent secondary schools
Description: press statement
Date: 22/03/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRESS STATEIVENT:

           INiALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                  March 22nd, 1964


                      DETAILS OF COI,LONWEALTH GRANTS FOR SCIENCE FACILITTES 
                       IN BOTH STATE AND INDEPENDENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS.


                       During the election the Prime Minister amongst other things 
          promised that £5,000,000 would be made available for the provision of 
          science buildings and equipment in secondary schools.

                       There is a clear national purpose underlying this policy item. 
          In this modern scientific and technological age we want and we need more 
          scientists and more technicians. We will need them for industry and for 
          agriculture so that we can advance and use modern scientific discoveries 
          that are made overseas.

                       It might have been thought that we were getting enough scientists 
          and technicians and that we do not need specifically to encourage more people 
          to be better scientists. Strangely enough, and I was surprised when I saw 
          the figures, this is not so. In the universities it is the subjects that 
          come under the very broad heading of the Humanities that seem to be under 
•         pressure from the great numbers entering the universities, people who study
          art, literature, English, history - even the Classics. Relatively speaking 
          the pressure on some science facilities has not been great.

                       The Prime Minister made it quite clear that the funds available 
          would be made available to both independent and State schools, and over recent 
          weeks procedures have been worked out so that any school that believes it has 
          a case for some of this assistance can apply.

                       £5M. will be made available each year. This will be divided 
          between State and independent schools by getting the number of people in the
          secondary schools enrolled in each group.  The total money available will be 
          divided in proportion to these numbers. This will be done on an Australia- 
          wide basis, and on present numbers it will mean that £3,750,000 will be avail- 
          able for the Government secondary schools in Australia and £1,250,000 will be 
          available for the non-Government schools.

                      The funds available to the Government schools will then be broken 
          up between the different States in proportion to the population of the States. 
•         Each State will be entirely responsible for spending the total funds allotted 
          to it in ways which, in its opinion, best suit the requirements of education in 
          that State.

                      There are only one or two conditions that the Commonwealth is
          requiring.   The funds of course must be spent for science teaching 
          laboratories in secondary schools or for the capital equipment for such 
          laboratories. The sums must be clearly indentifiable in each State Budget 
          and they must also be regarded as additional to any sums which the State 
          would normally be spending on this purpose.

                      The first funds will be made available in the next Budget of the 
          States for the year 1964/65. The States have all been told about this and 
          no doubt wiling deciding which schools qualify for the first grants.

                      In the case of non-Government schools the Commonwealth will be 
          solely responsible for deciding the grants and it will adopt the following 
         procedures. It will first allot the amount available to non-Government 
          schools between the different States in proportion to the population of the 
         States. The amount available to each State will then be divided into two parts. 
          One will be for assistance to non-Catholic schools within the boundaries of 
         that State and the other will be for assistance to Catholic schools within the
         State.   This division will be made by obtaining the number of secondary school



                                                                            /2

                                              2






          pupils enrolled in each group of independent schools, and the sum available 
          will be divided in proportion to those numbers. Thus, in each State, for the 
          independent schools, there will be a sum for assistance to Catholic schools 
          and a sum for assistance to non-Catholic schools.


                       All secondary schools, boys', girls' or co-educational, are 
          eligible for assistance, and any science-teaching laboratory, construction of 
          which began after 1st December, 1963, is eligible to be considered for assist- 
          ance. Buildings being constructed or finished before that date are not 
          eligible. Any school is eligible to apply for assistance for capital equip- 
          ment bought after December 1st, 1963. Money for these purposes will be made 
          available in the next Commonwealth budget - that is for the financial year 
          beginning July 1st this year.


                       Schools that want to seek assistance should make application for 
          it as soon as possible. Application should be made to the Minister in Charge 
          of Commonwealth Activities in Education, of the Prime Minister's Department. 
          I would be happy to forward any applications which might be made if there was 
          a wish to send them through me.


•                      It is highly probable that in the first years of the scheme many 
          schools will be applying and that it will not be possible immediately to meet 
          all requests at one stroke. For this reason it is intended to select schools 
          in each State which will be regarded as ones that merit first consideration. 
          This selection will be done by the Commonwealth, bearing in mind the number 
          of secondary school pupils at each school, the number of students doing science 
          courses and the teaching facilities that are already available and other 
          relevant matters. Even so, it will probably still be necessary to allot 
          priorities between schools which fall into this category.


                       The Commonwealth wants to create for this purpose two advisory
          bodies.   One body, drawn from people responsible for non-Catholic schools,
         will be asked to suggest priorities for such schools.  It will also be asked 
          to advise on the amount of assistance that should be extended to each one. 
         The other body, frawn from those responsible for Catholic schools, will be 
         asked to do the same thing for such schools. These advisory bodies have not 
         yet been established, but since the policy is going to operate from the middle 
         of this year it is clear that there is some urgency in having them established, 
         and I understand discussions are already in progress to achieve this.


                      This is an entirely new policy which has been introduced by the 
         Commonwealth, and it is one that has been introduced with firm national object-
         ives in mind.    The procedures and machinery that I have tried to outline very 
         briefly may well have to be adapted and altered as the Commonwealth, the States 
         and the schools all gain experience in the administration of these particular 
         proposals.


                      It can be clearly seen that Senator Gorton has been actively 
         engaged in this work in assistance to the Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister 
         himself and the Government have been active in trying to get this proposal 
         introduced as soon as possible.


                      I believe that the grants will be of great advantage to schools 
         in both categories - the State and the independent schools.


                      If any more information is required I hope Jeople won't hesitate 
         to get in touch with me.




                                        ----o0o----

