<!--start metadata-->
Title: International scene, domestic politics
Description: press statement
Date: 8/12/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         Pï3ESS STATEì-ENT:

         :NALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                    December 8th,1963


                              This will be my last talk until the 25th Parliament 
         assembles in 1964. I thought it might be appropriate to look back 
         briefly over the past year to pick out the more notable events.

         INTERNATIONAL SCENE:

                              1963 began in the aftermath of the late President
         Kennedy's Stand against the Russians over Cuba.       It Tay well be that 
         President Kennedy's determination at that time averted other possible • 
         conflicts. If a firm stand had not been made in the Cuban incident 
         there would have been a tendency for the Russians to believe that under 
         pressure the West would always retreat. This could have led to renewed 
         attempts to destroy the freedom of West Berlin or to increased Communist 
         initiative in other areas. However we, in fact, saw to some degree a 
         softening of the relationships between the United States and the Soviet 
         Union. In the middle of the year, the Test Ban Treaty was signed by 
         these major Powers, closely followed by Australia and more than 100 
         other nations. This Test Ban Treaty was significant, not so much for 
         what it achieved but because it is the first positive example of an 
         agreement being reached between the East and the West since the major 
         cleavage between the Free and Communist Powers became recognised after
         the last war.    It should not be forgotten also that one of the reasons 
         that compelled the Russians to come to this agreement with the West was 
         the growing difference of opinion between Russia and her so-called ally 
         Communist China.

                              There is a vast difference between these two countries, 
         the Russians in theory recognise that nuclear weapons have made war out 
         of date and an unacceptable means of attaining their objective. They 
         now profess to believe they can overcome the Western Powers through other 
         forms of opposition and competition, in short, by using all means at 
         their disposal except war. The Chinese, on the other hand, still believe, 
         or say they believe, that war between themselves and the Western countries 
         will one day be inevitable. They go on to say they will win such a war 
41111111;and even if they lose half their population they would still have 300 
         or 400 million people left. The Russians cannot accept this Chinese 
         view.

                              In the face of China's determination to develop her 
         own nuclear weapons the Russians have been perhaps forced to try and come 
         a little nearer the Western countries. This clearly had an effect in 
         assisting the United States and Great Britain to come to an agreement with 
         the Soviet Union over the Test Ban Treaty.

                              These events brought the lat resident Kennedy to a 
         high watermark of international fame. He became recognised as a great 
         leader of the Free world, perhaps he would have been recognised as the 
         greatest if he had been given an opportunity to pursue these policies 
         to their fulfilment. He could be tough when it was necessary but he 
         was always willing to negotiate. His policies have been well proved 
         over the last twelve months.

                              There was never a thought that the Free world would 
         lose this Leader, instead there had been much discussion in the United 
         States of which Republican would try to unseat him at the Presidential
         elections in 1964.    Then the world learned of President Kennedy's 
         assassination with horror and dismay. The greatest tribute that the 
         Free world can pay this President is to work continually for the ideals 
         for which the President himself strove, to carry his policies through so 
         that a more lasting security can be developed.


                                                                                 /2

                                        -  2 -




                          President Johnson, a most able and astute politician 
       with a great strength of character and complete integrity, may well be 
       the person to achieve this. He has already announced that President 
       Kennedy's major policies will be pursued by his administration. He has 
       already asked the United States Congress, as a tribute to President 
       Kennedy, to pass an adequate Civil Rights Bill which would complete the 
       work of emancipation of the American negro begun by President Lincoln
       centuries earlier.    President Johnson seems already to have captured 
       the confidence of many people and his first major speeches have been very 
       well received.

       DOMESTIC POLITICS:

                          On the domestic scene there was continual speculation 
       as to whether the Government would survive; whethere there would be an 
       election this year or next. This speculation has, of course, been put 
       at rest with the results that we all know.

                          The Parliamentary year was a relatively quiet one with
       a major debate of course over the Radio Base at the North West Cape, It
       was a busy legislative year but many of the matters that were introduced
411    by the Government achieved Opposition support or only token criticism.

                          The first months of the next Parliament will inevitably 
       be busy because the proposals included in the Frime Minister's policy speech,
       which the people of Australia have endorsed, will involve quite a heavy
       legislative program.  In addition to this there will be the Restrictive 
       Trade Practices legislation coming into the Parliament which is certain to 
       involve a long and protracted debate.

                          The 25th Parliament will be quite different from the
       last.   There should be no speculation as to how long the Parliament will 
       endure, with a majority of about twenty the Parliament must run its three 
       years. This will enable Ministers more fully to devote their complete 
       attention to their Ministerial duties without worrying day by day and week 
       by week about the fact of political survival.

                          I believe the next Parliament will be an interesting 
       one. It will be one in which the Government and its supporters will be 
       straining every effort to justify the confidence that the people of 
       Australia have placed in them. The extent of the victory for the Govern- 
       ment and for the Prime Minister in particular, imposes a very real 
       responsibility , not only on the Prime Minister but also on all his 
       supporters. This is a responsibility that we all willingly accept and 
       will strive to execute in the interests of every person in Australia.

                          And now if I can leave politics for this year. We 
       will shortly be entering the holiday period and peoples thoughts will be
       far removed I believe from the recent election.  I would like to wish 
       you all a very Happy Xas and a Prosperous and Successful New Year.




                                           00o

