<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rabbits
Description: press statement
Date: 21/10/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:

                          October 21st,1962
             R ,Q B B T T .S

        The rabbit story has just about gone a full circle. 
Several years ago efforts to establish myxomatosis in Australia were 
successful.

        The destruction of the wild rabbit created a scarcity 
of rabbit meat, also of rabbit fur. As a result, there were people in 
various States, particularly in New South Wales, Tasmania and West Australia, 
who thought there would be a future in rabbit farming. Several rabbit 
farms- were established in these three States.

        It may seem strange that the rabbit, which has been proved 
a most expensive curse to the Australian farmer and pastoralist, is now 
becoming to other people an animal to be farmed carefully and, to some 
degree, scientifically. The domestic rabbit is a slightly different type 
from the wild Australian rabbit and would be unlikely to survive in the 
natural Australian environment.

        If the matter had been left in this position I do not 
think anyone would have objected strongly to the activities of these 
commercial rabbit farmers. However, about ten years ago, a new element 
was introduced - fibroma virus - which makes rabbits immune to myxomatosis. 
It first came into this country because an eminent scientist was having 
experiments interrupted because the experimei_taï rabbits were dying at 
inconvenient times from myxomatosis. He obtained permission to import 
some fibroma virus for his scientific rabbits.

        Even at this stage I do not think anyone could validly 
object to what was done. However, the commercial rabbit farmers of New 
South Wales heard about fibroma virus and got permission from the New 
South Wales Government to use it. The New South Wales Government obtained 
the fibroma virus, licensed manufacturers in that State to produce it, and 
allowed commercial rabbit farmers to use it. This step was taken without 
much discussion, without much thought to the future, and certainly without 
consideration being given to the general question of rabbit control 
throughout the country.

        For a considerable time commercial rabbit farmers used 
fibroma virus without anyone being much aware of what was going on, but 
then people in Victoria, concerned with the control and destruction of the 
wild rabbit population, became aware of the position. Farming and grazing 
organizations begam to be most concerned. The danger was that a mosquito 
that had bitten a rabbit that had just been inoculated with fibroma virus 
would be likely to go and bite a wild rabbit and spread the fibroma virus 
amongst the wild rabbit population. If this occurred the effectiveness of 
myxomatosis would be greatly reduced and perhaps destroyed. While 
myxomatosis is not the 99% killer that it was in the initial stages it is 
still a most potent weapon in the anti-rabbit campaign, and anything that 
might jeopardise its effectiveness should be outlawed.

       Various discussions began about this problem. Attempts 
were made to bring pressure to bear on the New South Wales Government. 
As a result of Victorian initiative, but with the co-operation of New 
South Wales and C.S.I.R.O., Dr. Shope, the eminent virologist, was brought 
to Australia. He is a member of the Rockerfeller Institute, and was 
brought out here to examine the effectiveness of myxomatosis and was to 
give his views concerning the danger involved in the use of fibroma virus.




                              /2.

                                 - 2 -


                 I have read Dr. Shope's report in fu'?_ and it is clearly 
his view that fibroma virus should be outlawed, and that unless it is out- 
lawed there is a real possibility of its reducing the effectiveness of 
myxomatosis. He said in his report that the hazard from fibroma virus 
used as a vaccination in domestic rabbits, might be higher than currently 
thought. H e goes on to say that the risks involved were of an unknown 
magnitude. However, if there was still to be a determination on behalf 
of some States to allow the use of fibroma virus for commercial rabbit farms 
then this use should be under the most rigidly controlled conditions. Dr. 
Shope's report, together with the C.S.I.R.O. view, was discussed by the 
Agricultural Council.

                The Agricultural Council is a forum in which matters of
concern to Commonwealth and States are discussed.  It is to some degree 
handicapped by the fact that if any one State Minister objects he can 
prevent the Council achieving anything. This may be why the Agricultural 
Council issued a statement that fibroma virus should only be used by
commercial rabbit farms in the most strictly controlled conditions. If it 
had not been for New South Wales I believe the Council would have recommended 
the outlawing of fibroma virus.

                New South Wales is the only State that now allows the use 
of fibroma virus. Rabbit farming is becoming less respectable. The 
permits to farm rabbits in Western Australia will be cancelled at the end 
of five years, and in Tasmania the same course is likely. Rabbit farming 
is not allowed in Victoria. This will leave New South Wales as the one 
State which not only farms rabbits but allows the continued use of fibroma 
virus, which is a hazard that can involve the whole farming and grazing 
community in greatly increased expenditure.

                The statement recently issued by the New South Wales 
Minister for Agriculture was a very disappointing one. The commercial 
rabbit farms are going to be allowed to continue using fibroma virus 
subject to certain controls, but I cannot really believe that controls will 
be adequate or that they will be supervised. For example, rabbits are to 
be kept in mosquito proof cages. This probably means flywire, but we all 
know how easy it is for this wire to be punctured. How often are we bitten 
by mosquitoes in our own houses that are meant to be mosquito proof?

                There are other strange aspects of the special controls in 
New South Wales. No new permits are going to be issued for new rabbit 
farms. This means that the farms at present operating have been given a 
monopoly and their permits would probably be worth many thousands of £s. 
on the open market. Only one manufacturer is to be allowed to produce 
fibroma virus so he, too, has a monopoly worth, I would think, a great deal 
of money.

                It should be remembered that Dr. Shope was brought out 
here at the request of the New South Wales Government, together with
Victoria and the C.S.I.R.O.  The most important element in his report has 
been ignored. That is that fibroma virus should not be used but that it
should be outlawed.  It is all the more strange because the Minister for 
Agriculture in New South Wales in his press statement admitted the risk 
of fibroma virus spreading to the wild rabbit copulation. He said that 
the risk was "very small" to use his exact words. But he should think of 
the issues involved and the extra millions of £s. that farmers and 
pastoralists will have to mend in controlling rabbits if the effectiveness 
of myxomatosis is destroyed. Tf there is one chance In ten millions that 
fibroma could spread and have this result, then it should not be used. 
No scientist would be prepared to say that the risk was as small as this 
and Dr. Shope, the expert, believes the risk to be of "unknown magnitude".





                                                                    /3.

                                  3


                 This decision by the New South Wales Government,which has 
granted a monopoly to a small and unimportant industry, involves great risks 
for the whole farming and pastoral industries. I cannot understand how any 
Government, knowing as it does the importance of the rurc1 industries to
Australia, could allow this position to prevail. That the position does 
prevail is due to divided responsibility between Commonwealth & States.

                 The Commonwealth could have prevented the Professor bringing 
fibroma into the country, but few people would object to fibroma virus being 
used under laboratory conditions. However, Wince fibroma was in the country 
there was and is no adequato machinery to prevent it getting into the hands 
of the New South Wales Government and from them to the rabbit farmers who are 
under the control of State Governments and not of the Commonwealth. Thus, 
the New South Wales Government, by its negligence and lack of concern, is 
running the risk of adding unknown extra sums to the cost of the farmer land 
agriculturalists in Australia.

