<!--start metadata-->
Title: Summary of election campaign
Description: press statement
Date: 27/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     PRESS STATEMENT:

     MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                     November 27th,1963

                                SUMMARY

                    Malcolm Fraser said at Warrnambool -

                    At the end of this :reek Australians will decide the 
     Government of this country for the 25th Parliament. At every meeting I 
     have attended I have tried to stress the importance of the foreign policy 
     issues, of our committment to the new Malaysia and of our Agreement with 
     the United States over the Radio Base.

                    Of the first of these I think it is important to.
     remember that our committment to Malaysia is really only backing up an 
     undertaking that had been given by the United Kingdom who has large:1 forces 
     in the area, and we should also remember that Malaysia is a member of the 
     Commonwealth of Nations and is a country that is as strongly democratic as 
     we are. If there is any country in Asia that deserves our support Malaysia 
     is one. Support for the Government at this election will re-affirm the 
     committment that the Government has undertaken and I believe this to be
     necessary as the statementtby the Opposition have been equivocal and clouded, 
     to say the least.

                    Secondly, the agreement over the North West Cape is really 
     only an extension of the ANZUS Treaty in which the United States, Australia 
     and New Zealand undertake to assist each other if attacked, and to do every- 
     thing that can be done to build up the security and defence of the region. 
     What has been done on the Radio Base is really only an extension of the
     ANZUS pact. On this issue again the Opposition's attitude is clouded 
     and vague at the best. At the worst it could lead to the American 
     withdrawal of the base and repercussions to the ANZUS Treaty itself.

                    If these foreign policy issues that have arisen in the 
     last 12 or 18 months were not so important, if they did not demand even 
     a decision by the Australian people, I would be perfectly happy to fight 
     this election on the domestic record of the Government which, taken over 
     its period of fourteen years, will stand any scrutiny.
     National output and productivity in both primary and secondary industries
411 has increased. Government policy has been to work towards this end and
     especially to assist private enterprise. Government policy will, in the 
     future, be followed to the same end.

                    The record of performance in the past, of high and 
     expanding output, of a high and full level of employment can be taken as 
     a guarantee that the Government's pledges and promises for the future will 
     be fulfilled.

                    New items of policy announced in the Prime Minister's 
     policy speech are modest in their cost bat important to the people they 
     are designed to help, especially those items that conce;-n education. 
     They are designed to indicate or to show that the Government is continually 
     looking to the future and that it will continue to bring forward new ideas 
     which will be to the advantage of the country, ideas that are sound and 
     practical in every sense.



                                    o0o

