<!--start metadata-->
Title: Federal election
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 19/11/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       BROADCAST                                     3HA Sunday, November 19 
                                                     3Y3 Thursday, November 23 
                                                     31K Wednesday, November 22

            The last few months have witnessed some of the most far-reaching 
       developments in Commonwealth Government policy Australia has ever known. 
       With an election close at hand, it's worth considering who has gained the 
       most from these developments, and who stands to gain fromlthe further 
       undertakings the Government has given in the last week or so.

            There's little doubt about - the main beneficiary is the fanilt man.
       In the Budget three months ago, personal income tax was reduced by an average
•      of 10 per cent on top of the 2i mer cent tax cut last April. For a man on the 
       average wage -with a wife and three children the reduction is far more 
       substantial - about 25 per cent.

            In the Budget the Government relieved some of the heavy burden on the 
       family man by increasing all dependents' allowances.

            There were big cuts in estate duties. All exemption levels have been
      doubled so that, for instance, a suburban estate of up to $40,000 going wholly 
       to close relatives will attract no duty at all. Such an estate with a net 
       value of $60,000- would have dut7 reduced fzo m $3500 to $937. Larger suburban 
       estates of, say, $150,000, will have reductions of duty from $25,500 to 
       $21,642.

            Primary production estates of up to $48,000 will now be exempt of duty. 
       A $60,000 estate will attract duty of only $225 instead of $1462, a $1000,000
       estaterduty of $2762 instead of $5462, andan estate of $150000 duty of 
       l0,242 instead of $13097.

            The means test of pensions has been eased and will be abolished within 
      three years so that the family man will know that when he retires he will be
       eligible for an age pension, an entitlement that many people regard a heir
       right as life-long taxpayers.

                                         2.

             The education measures in the Budget were to say the least, spectacular. 
        As a result, there will be more than 120,000 students on Commonwealth 
        scholarships at any one time. The number of secondary scholarships is more 
        than double and the award changed so that most of the money goes to low income 
        families.

             The Budget helped the family man buy his house. The maximum value of a
       home which may attract a grant was increased to $17,500' to $22,500, anhe
        maximum grant itself lifted from $500 on savings of $1500 to $750 on savings 
        of $2250. Then there is our scheme to assist in the establishment and canning
 •      of child care centres at a cost of some $23 million in the first three full 
        years.

             For the family who undertake to care for an aged relative in their own 
        home, there's a $14 a we home nursing subsidy.




•


                                                                 /3

    Last week's policy speech by the Prime Minister builds on the Budget 
    developments responsibly and realistically, in ways that can be
    implemented. The Government guarantees loans for young people 
    to buy land for their homes. We will also help young married people 
    to meet the repayments on their housing loans by paying them half 
    the annual interest up to a limit of 3250 in the first year of the 
    loan, and at a reducing rate later. As long as you began paying off 
    your home no earlier than January 1st 1970, then you're eligible. 
    Its in the new education programmes that families really stand to
    benefit so greatly.
    We will provide X75 million over the next three years for capital 
    and recurrent expenditure to assist the Statesto expand pre-school
•   education.
    The Commonwealth will allocate not less than $20 million a. year in a 
    broadened commitment to technical education, and will double the 
    number of technical scholarships to 5,000 a year, again with most of 
    the award going to students from low income families.
    We'll give an education allowance of 3400 a year free of means test
    for children n isolated  areas who must live away f rom home in 
    order to attend school, or who have to be taught at home.
    Special attention has been paid to the physically and mentally 
   handicapped, and under-privileged school age children, at a cost in 
    the first year of 310 million.
•   ode alsd plan to extend our programme of building libraries in secondary 
   schools to include libraries in primary schools.
   Parents will welcome the Government's decision to provide a free 
   nation-wide dental service for school children in co-operation with 
   the States, beginning with children under 6 years of age. we hope to 
   start this scheme next year, and then it is fully developed it will 
   provide for all school children. up to the age of 15.

                                                .../3

   Low income families will benefit considerably under assistance with 
   health insurance. bar those with an income under 857.5u a week, 
   the Government will pay health insurance premiums in full, and will 
   lift the eligibility limit by $4 a week for each member of the family 
   in excess of 2.
   There are other undertakings which the Prime Minister gave and which 
   have a direct or indirect bearing on the family man - things like 
   increases in the handicapped children's benefit, and of course the 
   automatic adjustments in pensions in line with increases in the 
   consumer price indexes.
   In fact, the Government in the last year or two has demonstrated not
   by vague promises, but by firm positive action, that health, social
•  services, education, housing and all the areas of Government activity 
   that closely affect the family man rank very high in the order of 
   national priorities.
   uur latest policy proposals are no more nor less than a logical
   development      of the concern that the Commonwealth has for the 
   family and its place in the Australian community.





•

