<!--start metadata-->
Title: A day at Canberra
Description: press statement
Date: 9/07/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    PRESS STATEMENT
                                                          July 9th, 1961
                                       A DAY AT CANBERRA
                            I thought some of you may be interested to hear what 
                    goes on during an average clay curing a session of Parliament 
                    at Canberra.
                            About 9 o'clock in the morning members start to arrive 
                    at Parliament house, either to go through correspondence and 
                    electoral matters that have come in the early morning mail, 
                    or to attend one of the many Committee meetings that are held 
                    between backbenchers.
                            It is not always realised that the backbench members 
                    of the Government have formed themselves into many Committees
                    that deal with all aspects of our national life. Various 
                    Committees deal especially with subjects like Social Services, 
                    National Development, the ool Industry, Industrial Relations, 
                    Mining, Taxation and financial matters. These are but a few 
                    of the Committees that have been formed. The purpose of these 
                    Committees is to enable members to inform themselves properly 
N                   on matters that have a close relationship to problems in their 
                    electorates, or to national problems in which members are 
                    particularly interested, and by doing this it is possible to 
                    exert a much greater influence through the Party Room on 
                    Government Policy.
                          If we suppose the day I have chosen to describe is a 
                    Wednesday the members would sit in these Committees from about
                    9.00 a.m. to 10.30 a,m.  Then at 10.30 a.m. all members of 
                    the Liberal Party of Australia and the Country Party go to 
                    their Party Room for the weekly Party meetings. At this 
                    Party meeting the first item on the agenda is nearly always
                    !!Bills to be explained'. These are Bills which the Government 
 •                  wishes to bring in which must be explained to the Party and 
                    which get the approval or criticism of the Party at that meeting. 
                    After Government business, as it is called, has been finished, 
                    then private members may bring up any matters which they want 
                    to. what happens in the party meetings should not be related 
                    in public, but the general procedure of what goes on can be
                    mentioned.  This might involve criticism of Government policy; 
                    it might be suggestions for action that a particular member or 
                    a group of members believe the Government should take. The 
                    atliosphere is frank and friendly and sometimes quite hard-
                    hitting.  Party meetings are an effective method of influencing 
                    Government policy, but they are only effective if the member 
                    concerned can put in a great deal of spade work on the particular 
                    matter which interests him.
                          For example, I would like to mention two matters which 
                    never would have been brought to a successful conclusion had 
                    it not been for exercises in the Party room. One of these 
                    was the rail standardization between Albury and Melbourne - 
                    which was initiated in the first instance by a Rail

                                              2 -
                    Standardization Committee set up by Bill Wentworth; and the 
                    other was a small matter concerning the export of birds which 
                    was of great interest to many nature lovers throughout Australia. 
                    It was because of the opinions shown in the Party Room that 
                    the export of birds was banned.
                           A Party Meeting will continue until one o'clock, then 
                    members go to lunch - as do most people throughout the country.
                           The Parliament meets at a quarter past two, and the 
                    bells ring for five minutes summoning members for the first
                    sitting of the day.  when the bells stop the Speaker enters 
                    the Chamber, he reads the Prayers of Dedication of members and 
                    the Lord's Prayer, and then the Parliament gets down to business. 
                    Petitions are called for, and then the Speaker asks members if 
                    they have any questions which they wish to ask Ministers without
                    notice.  The Leader of the Opposition is always given
                    precedence if he wishes to ask a question, otherwise questions 
                    go alternatively between the Opposition and the Government side. 
                    Questions last for three-quarters of an hour, after which time 
N                   the Parliament will get down to the business of the day, which 
                    might well be a Government Bill - which must be passed through 
                    Parliament, or it could be an Urgency Motion. Urgency Motions 
                    can be held on any matter and are initiated in this way.
                    A member writes to the Speaker telling the Speaker that a matter 
                    of urgent national importance has arisen and that he wants the
                    matter discussed in the Parliament. The Speaker will tell 
                    the Parliament that he has had this letter. He will ask for 
                    all those members supportsing the discussion to rise in 
                    their places - at least twenty members must rise to support 
                    such an Urgency Motion - and if they do rise a debate will 
                    be held that will last for two hours.
                            However, the greater part of the business of Parliament 
 •                  is Government business.
                            The Parliament would rise at o o'clock for dinner, and 
                    resume again at 8 o'clock.
                            Very often private members would seize the two hours 
                    available between six and eight to have a further Meeting of
                    one of their own private members' Committees. If they do this 
                    they have a quick meal, served during the Committee meeting. 
                    Private members' Committees often have to meet in this way 
                    because it is not proper for such Committees to meet during the 
                    actual sitting of Parliament, when a member's place is inside 
                    the Chamber.
                            The sitting of the House will continue to anything up
                    to 1 o'clock or 2 o'clock in the morning. Government business 
                    will very likely stop at about 11 o'clock, unless it is
                    towards the end of the Session when it is sometimes proceeded 
                    with until the small hours of the morning.
                            When the Government business for the day has been 
                    finished the Minister at the Table will move that the House do
                    now adjourn.  If any members of the Opposition or the

  a                                         3 -
                  Government wish to speak on the adjournment, as it is called,
                  he may then rise and speak for ten minutes.  On the adjournment 
                  he can speak on any matter that is dear to his heart and which 
                  he feels needs mentioning in the national Parliament.
                        Very often members. seize this particular opportunity to 
                  push something which is of particular interest to their own 
                  electorates.
                        It provides a good opportunity for members to gain a 
                  knowledge of matters that are happening in different parts of
                  Australia.   For example, two or three members have, on different 
                  occasions, mentioned the development that has occurred at
                  Portland Harbour.  Winton Turnbull, myself and, I think, one
                  other, have done this on more than one occasion. It should 
                  not be thought that such matters are irrelevant to the national 
                  Parliament because they are an important part of Australia's 
                  progress.
                        The sitting for the day can be ended in two ways. Firstly, 
                  if no more members wish to speak on the Adjournment the Speaker 
r                 rises in his place and says that the House stands adjourned 
                  until 10.30 a.m. or 2.30 p.m. tomorrow, as the case may be. 
                  Alternatively, if the debate has gone on for a considerable time, 
                  and if it is getting very late, the Minister in charge of the
                  House may move that the question be now put. In which case 
                  a vote would be taken, and if the vote is in favour of closing
                  the Adjournment debate the Speaker will adjourn the House until
                  the next day.  This would mean that any member who wished to 
                  speak and who got cut out on that evening would be able to 
                  speak on the Adjournment debate the following day.



 •

