<!--start metadata-->
Title: Government aid to primary producers
Description: press statement
Date: 26/06/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT                                 June 26th, 1960
MALCOLM FRASER:
                   GOVERNMENT AID TO PRIMARY PRODUCERS
           Last week I summarised briefly some of the things which 
have been done over the last ten years to aid primary production.
Today I wish to deal briefly with research arrangements that have been 
introduced in recent years, and I also want to say a few words about 
the future relationship between different Pririary Industry Organizations 
and the Government.
           In the sphere of research the Government has passed
legislation to establish Trust Funds or Trust Accounts so that research 
could be expanded in the following primary industries wool, wheat,
tobacco, dairy produce, butter and cheese, wine and beef. The
Government, in these research funds subsidises, generally on an equal
basis, the contributions that are made by the members of the different
primary industries. For example, under the Wool Research Act, which
establishes the Wool Research Committee, the growers contribute at the
moment 2/— a bale, while 4/— a bale comes from the Commonwealth for
,cool research.
            In addition, this organization has a reserve of £8M, some
of which recent negotiations may make available for immediate research
of one kind or another.
            In this recent Session of Parliament a Cattle and Beef
Reserve Trust Account was established. Under this the maximum rate of
levy is 2/— per beast killed, and for every £1. collected the Commonwealth
would contribute another £1. to research. In a normal year a levy
from the Industry should be over £300,000, making £600,000 available
with the Government contribution.
            In addition to this there is the Dairy Industry Trust
Account which was established in 1958 to establish a research and sales
program to aid the Dairy Industry.
             I don't think there is any need for me to underline the
work that these Research Funds and Research Committees are doing.
I think, for our respective industries, we all know that research is
vital, and we all know that it can help to make us not only more
efficient, but it can also help us to turn out a better product at a
cheaper price.

           Even though the Government has done a great deal to assist
primary industries over its ten years of office, I would not pretend
to say that more will not need to be done in the future. I believe 
the development of our primary industries in this country is a
continuous process of evolution, and as some problems are conquered 
and overcome other ones will continually arise. This is particularly 
so in the field of research, not only research into farmers individual 
problems but research into how to improve the finished product. This
is particularly noticeable in the wool textile field. I would not 
be surprised if the myt ten to fifteen years saw a minor revolution 
in our research set—up throughout the Commonwealth. By this I don't 
mean to say that our present Organizations are inefficient. Within 
the limits of their resources the C.S.I.R.O. and State Departments 
have done a wonderful job, but when we have regard to the fact that 
better research offers the best and perhaps the only real means of 
reducing farmer' costs, then we can see how important this is.
An increasing proportion of our recources will probably have to be 
devoted to these ends in both State and Federal spheres.
           This problem might not have been so important over the 
last ten years when in general, except for the last year or two, we have 
had seasons that have been better than average and prices that have been 
much better than average. But over the next ten years our primary 
industries, while they will still$e profitable, will not have such an 
easy time as they have had over the last ten and, therefore, more 
intensive efforts in regard to research and sales promotion and 
organization generally will be most important.
           There is one matter in this regard in which primary 
industries can do a great deal to help themselves and, at the same time,
help the Government.   In nearly every Industry, whether you take wool, 
butter or beef or any of the other primary industries, there is more 
than one organization representing the Industry. Now that is perfectly 
all right, it doesn't matter how many organizations represent the
Industry so long as the organizations do their jobs sincerely and well, 
and I believe that this is nearly always the case. However, organizations
have not done sufficient to liaise amongst themselves, and very often

                                 3 -
they give conflicting advice to the Government.  The Government quite
rightly says it will do what it can to help industries when they know 
exactly what the industry wants, but the Government's hands are tied 
and the organization is tied if one half of an industry says do this 
and another half of an industry says do that. In this part of
Western Victoria when I speak in this way people will most probably 
think of wool, but there are other examples which, in their own way 
are, or to the people concerned, just as important.
         Two months ago the Federal Parliament passed the legislation
to establish the Cattle and Beef Research Trust Account. This 
legislation would have been passed three years ago and research would 
have been begun three years ago if the organizations concerned, 
representing beef interests, had not been sq»abbling among themselves
on the composition of the Beef Research Committee. The organizations 
were concerned with their own importance and with their own 
representation and they were prepared to hold up the establishment 
of a Beef Research Trust Account for three years to satisfy the 
vanity of themselves or of their own organizations. When industry 
leaders act in this way they are not giving their, members a fair go. 
It means the people who are growing beef are not getting the benefits 
that they should be getting from membership of their different 
organizations. This problem was solved in regard to beef research 
after constant negotiations between the Minister and the different 
organizations, but it took three years and three years of research 
were lost.
         The example of this Beef Trust Account should serve as a 
warning to all primary producers.
         If economic conditions are going to be more difficult over the 
next ten years it is essential that the different industries, whether 
it be wool, beef, dairying or any of the others, should all be in a 
position to give united, concerted and sensible advice to the Government 
so that the Government may act firmly in the interests of the different
industries.   If the experience of the past is ignored, and if 
conflicting and differing advice is given to Governments, then the 
Governments' efforts to help primary producers will be made extremely
difficult, if not impossible.

