<!--start metadata-->
Title: Unemployment, economic difficulties, Labor government
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 24/11/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL STATEMENT EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m. 24.11.74.

   THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 
      ELECTORAL RADIO TALK

At last Bob Hawke has said it. He indicated that he expected 
the January unemployment figures to show 300,000 unemployed. Last 
week I said that I believe the summer figures would indicate 350,000 
out of work, 100,000 of them are likely to be school leavers unable 
to get jobs.

This is the tragic result of two years of Labor. It has occurred 
because the Government has utterly mis-judged its handling of the 
Australian economy. It has occured because the Government has 
pressed forward with its own ideas of what Australians ought to do, 
ignoring the wishes and needs of many thousands of people.

In recent years the Australian community has become concerned about 
much wider issues than ever before. One of the legacies of the 
former Government was full employment and a low level of inflation. 
There was predictability, stability and certainty. Somebody who 
was willing to give a fair day's work for a fair day's pay did not 
have to worry about his economic future. He knew his job was going 
to be there. He knew the pay would be there. This left Austral- 
ians much freer to look to other. issues - how to improve our soc- 
iety, provide a more equal opportunity for people who might have 
been disadvantaged earlier in life.

Now, however, we are rapidly approaching the problems and difficul- 
ties of the 1930's. Australians are once again concerned for 
security, for jobs.

The Government announced some measures a short while ago which 
were designed to restore business confidence. I have spoken with 
many business leaders in the days since the last budget and not 
one has indicated any change in forward investment plans as a 
result of those recent announcements. That means business is not 
going to plan to put out large sums for new investment which alone 
can create the jobs necessary to keep Australians fully employed.

I wish the Government would act with greater vigour and with greater 
strength in these matters. The Government would attract credit 
to itself by that. There is no consolation in the Opposition gain- 
ing political strength through the gross errors and mismanagement 
of this Government when the price has to be paid by the people of 
Australia.

While the Prime Minister has made a half bow in the direction of 
private enterprise and while the former Treasurer has made a bow 
in the direction of profits the attitude of the Government to 
profits and private enterprise remain highly suspect.

                              ../2

                                                          2.

The appointment of Dr Cairns as Treasurer is unlikely to relieve 
that gloom because a widening circle of Australians know Jim 
Cairns' ultimate objective. He has certainly been very honest 
about it and has not sought to conceal it. But it is not an 
objective that many Australians would share with him.

Despite the nature of our present Prime Ministership Australia 
is lost and rudderless with individuals and businesses not knowing
what lies ahead.  In this uncertain climate I would not be sur- 
prised if unemployment rose even more than I have forecast.

December and January are two unproductive months for business. 
There are many holidays and I have been told that a number of 
businesses will be laying people off over these months knowing 
that in a high state of unemployment they would be able to re- 
employ people in February or March once the holiday season is 
over. If that is so the summer increase in unemployed could be 
very much greater than that which has been anticipated.

If this situation is to be reversed businesses,whether they be 
one man or great concerns operating in every part of Australia, 
need much more incentive and encouragement than they have so
far been given by the Government. Individuals need incentive 
to work.

Au-tralia is a nation in distress - the golden hopes of December 
1972 established in the minds of many people have been dashed 
asunder and destroyed. They have proved to be as ephemeral and 
as passing as a rainbow.

We need to re-establish a sense of national purpose and direction. 
We need to re-establish confidence in ourselves as individuals 
and as a nation. There needs to be a wide public acceptance that 
hard work, initiative, enterprise, responsibility and skill will 
be rewarded in the Australian community.

We need to recognise also that in the former Treasurer's words 
higher wages are taking jobs away from other people. As a nation 
we have to learn restraint. We have to put aside the selfishness 
that has embodied so many of our actions in recent times and 
recognise that there is only Australia. The Federal Government 
must seek to give direction to this nation by consistency in its 
own actions, by adherence to principles which apply the law and 
the actions of Government equally to all groups and to all people.

Last week the lack of direction and consistency of action on the

                                                       ../3

•                            3.

  part of this Government was demonstrated by the Minister for 
  Transport's attitude to the pay claims of TAA and ANSETT pilots. 
  The pilots had a two year agreement which was a closed and fixed 
  agreement which ran out in September of this year. It has to be 
  re-negotiated or it has to go to Arbitration.

  The Minister for Labour for two years has been trying to introduce 
  changes to industrial law designed to persuade people that they 
  must negotiate, that employers and employees must consult about 
  new awards and changed conditions. That has been the firm policy 
  of the Government and of the Australian Labor Party - until Mr 
  Jones, the Minister for Transport, came along and issued a direct- 
  ive to ANSETT and TAA that they must not negotiate or make any 
  offer to the air line pilots.

  If there are rules and principles for action they must apply in 
  all cases. Governments above all must apply rules equally to 
  all sections of the community. If they make one rule for one 
  group and another for another group Government becomes arbitrary, 
  unfair and unreasonable. This is precisely what the Government 
  has demonstrated over the air line pilots.

