<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool sales
Description: Broadcast
Date: 25/03/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


,:\BROADCAST                                     SUNDAY25 MARCH 1973
                                              THURSDAY 29 MARCH 1973
                                             WEDNESDAY 28 MARCH 1973.
 Portland is still in the news.
 I have just come from a meeting that was convened by the Honourable Murray 
 Burne to discuss the question of trade through Portland, and the attitude 
 of the Association of Employers of Waterside Labour to the payment of 
 port levies which, if unchanged, will do so much damage to trade through
 Portland.
 The meeting carried unanimously resolutions similar to those adopted at 
 Portland a week or two ago.
 The first resolution unanimously supported the Victorian Government's direct 
 approach to the Federal Government on behalf of the Port, and urges the
 Federal government to take immediate action. The second resolution 
 directly asks the Minister for Labour, Mr. Cameron, to make a direct 
 approach to the A,E,W,L, and to use his influence to have the levy decision
 reversed.   Thirdly, if a satisfactory reply is not received within a week 
 a deputation to Mr. Cameron would be arranged with representatives of the 
  State Government, local Members of Parliament, the Portland Harbor Trust, 
  and other authorities who would seek a direct meeting with Mr. Cameron.
  These resolutions re—affirm the points'ef view that were put at the earlier 
  meeting, and to which Mr. Cameron has so far given no reply. He and his 
  spokesmen continue to say that the change has resulted from something we 
  did in 1969. I am afraid that is nonsense. Mr. Cameron himself has said 
  that the increased levy is contrary to the Stevedoring Industry Charges Act, 
  and the fact is that it has occurred under the present Government. I 
  still firmly believe that if Mr. Cameron expressed a view firmly to the 
  A.E,W.L., then they would reverse their decision.

  One interesting fact has come to light in a letter to Mr. Byrne signed 
  by a Mr. Craig, the Executive Directoi of the A.E.W.L. The letter indicates 
  that on Friday 16th March, there were discussions with the Waterside 
  Workers Federation and the A,C.T.U. According to Mr. Craig, both these 
  organisations condemned the arrangements which had been applied by the 
  A,E,W,L, before the 5th of March this year. According to Mr. Craig, any 
  arrangements which required some of the smaller ports to subsidise other 
  small ports through the uniform system which had applied, was rejected 
  as being inequitable and entirely unreasonable.

          •
    1
 I hope that is not the reason we have not heard more from Mr. Cameron.

 I appreciate the fact that he sent Mr. Foster to Portland to speak first hand 

with people in Portland, because he will now have a first hand account of how 

seriously this matter is viewed.

But it is not only Portland. It is many other decentralised ports who will 

 suffer.

 I have reported before that I have been made Chairman of both Liberal Party 

 Primary Industry Committees — the Parliamentary Committee, and the Federal 

 Organisational Committee. Both committees have been meeting. We had long 

 discussions on the future of primary industries, and have recognised the 

 special need for a strong rural voice at the present time.

 At the Federal Rural Committee meeting last Friday, we discussed areas which 

 needed particular examination, and which would be important in developing new 

 policy. The work is being divided up between the various State Divisions of 

 the Liberal Party, and the Parliamentary Members, who will report back as soon

 as possible.

 I mentioned the need for a strong rural voice. This is emphasised by the 

 Government's recent decisions concerning Rural Reconstruction. As we know, a 

 decision has recently been made to continue the scheme, but at a much reduced 

 rate. The previous Government had provide` .t over $100 million in two years. A 

 primary industry newsletter published on 21st March reported that Senator 

 Wriedt sought to lift the rate of interest on debt reconstruction from 4 to 5%. 

 The States would not accept this. Senator Wriedt had earlier been in difficulty 

 with his own caucus in the matter, and there was a majority in Labor's
 Parliamentary caucus for the higher rate of interest.                   However, when Senator 

 Wriedt met State Ministers — including Victoria's Bill Borthwick — opposition 

 to the increased rate of interest was made plain, and was not acceptable to the 

 States, including the Labor States.


 Whereas we had provided over $100 million in two years, the present Government 

 is providing $36 million for the next financial year. $12 million of that 

 is likely to be a forward commitment, and the primary industry letter 

 indicates that the actual expenditure for 1973/74 is to be limited to $24

 million.      That is less than half the rate of expenditure that the previous 

 government had supported.



 I wonder how many people recall the promises that were made in the pre—election             period

3.
by the present Government, when farmers were told that $500 million would 
be made available at 3% interest.

It is true that there has been a great about face in the fortunes of 
rural industry, but there is still a need for people to reconstruct their 
debts and for farm build up funds to put primary industry generally into 
a stronger and better position to resist any future situation when the 
prices might not be as satisfactory as they now are.

This is not just a question of funds for farmers. The total rural economy 
is dependent upon prosperous industries within that economy, and the towns 
in our own district — Portland and Warrnambool, Hamilton, Casterton and 
north to Horsham, and all the tows in between — are dependent for their 
livelihoods on Australia's great exporting primary industries.

There is another report contained in the same primary industry news letter 
that the wool industry is in for a shock over research and promotion funds 
for the International Wool Secretariat. The previous Government had 
promised the International Wool Secretariat $133 million for research and
promotion over the years 1973-75. The Australian Wool Industry Conference
was informed of this decision last November. There are now initial 
reports indicating that the present Government is going to provide gréatly
reduced funds in this area.  I very much hope that the newsletter is not
correct in that prediction.

All this indicates the necessity for a strong rural voice in the opposition 
benches, one that can speak not just for one industry or another, but 
for total rural communities upon which so much of Australia depends.

