<!--start metadata-->
Title: Education
Description: press statement
Date: 18/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         PRESS STATEMENT:


         MALCOLM FRASER :


                                                               November 18th,1963




                                   EDUCATION




                         Malcolm Fraser said at Balmoral -


                         The present Commonwealth Government is the last Government 
         in Australia that should be attacked for lack of a sympathetic approach to
         education.    The present Prime Minister initiated Commonwealth payments 
         to the States for Universities purposes. These have now totalled nearly
         £100M. It initiated the Murray Commission, accepted its financial recommend-
         ations in full and established the Universities Commission. It has since 
         adepbted all financial recommendations of the Commission, including 
         recommendations for the next three years of University development which 
         will cost the Commonwealth over £60M.


                         In 1949 there were 31,000 University students, there are
         now 70,000.    University students have increased by 127% while the 
         population has increased by only 37%. In addition, University standards 
         are improving because a higher proportion of those who enter are now 
•        graduating.


                         Although the Commonwealth does not make direct grants 
         to the States for primary and secondary education the funds for these 
         purposes come from the general revenue and loan funds made available 
         to the States under formulae agreed upon by all the States in the 
         Commonwealth.


                         Over the period of the Government's term of office general 
         revenue funds have increased from £81M to £329M, Loan funds from £66M.
         to £272M. a year.    As a result of this the £37M that was spent on 
         all education purposes by the States in 1948/49 has increased by,.ver 
         £200M. this year. Education expenditure is, in fact, increasing by 
         25% every two years. Because of this Victoria has increased her 
         expenditure on education by a record £8M. in this year, bringing Victoria's 
         expenditure on education to a record £7314.


                         The different States give a different importance to the 
         progress of education. For example, in 1961 Queensland spent only 
•        £12.11.7. per head of population on education, while in Western Australia 
         £17.6,6. was spent. This indicates that the States have a flexibility 
         in their finances and some give this problem greater importance than 
         others.


                         The pressure on education has largely come from two
         sources - the So-called population bulge, which was the result of the 
         immediate postwar years and secondly it has been a result of a higher 
         percentage of people in the appropriate age group staying at secondary 
         schools longer or going to Universities where before they might not have
         done so. Combined these are the reasons for the very great increase in
         expenditure on education.   Since it is expected that a continually higher 
         proportion of people will want to get more education than they have in the 
         past these pressures are likely to be continued. Therefore, the expenditure 
         on education will rapidly expand in the future as it has in the past.


         NEW EDUCATION POLICY :


                         The Government's proposal to create 12,500 scholarships 
         valued at £200 for students in the last two years of secondary education 
         or technical schools should be a great help, especially to people in remote




                                                                         /2

                                         — 2 —



           areas who often can't send their children to secondary or technical schools
           without boarding them out in a local town.  Scholarships will, of course 
           be available for State or independent schools.

                             These scholarships are an indication that the greater 
           need for education places additional burdens on a family because a longer 
           time elapses before young people start to earn money.

                             The decision to pay 15/— for each child between the 
           age of 16 and 21 years who is undergoing full time education also follows
           the same lines and its motivation is much the same. It represents 
           the State accepting some of the burdens that higher education places 
           upon parents.




•

                                          o0o

