<!--start metadata-->
Title: Censure motion, radio base
Description: press statement
Date: 28/04/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRESS STATEIENT:


          MALCOL i FFASER:


                                                                 April 28th, 1963




                       In my last report I described a censure motion and said how a 
          large part of the debate ranged around issues involved in the establishment 
          of the United States Naval Communications Centre in Western Australia. In 
          this report I want to show why the Opposition is on the defensive on this 
          issue.


                       The Australian Labour Party Policy in peace and war has differed 
          greatly over matters of defence. During the last war the Curtin Govern- 
          ment behaved as I hope any patriotic hard-working Australian Government would 
          under similar circumstances. It pursued the war vigorously. Because 
          unified command was essential the Australian Forces were lamely put under 
          the control of our most powerful Ally - the United States. LCo-operation 
          with the United States was complete - for this there is only praise.


                      During the war the United States built a defence base at 
          Manus Island at a cost of £100,000,000. After the war the United States 
          tried to obtain a proper agreement with Australia for the permanent use of
~         +.his Mh.nus Island base, The then External Affairs I nister, Dr. Evatt, 
          procrastinated so long over the negotiations that the Americans came to 
          the conclusion that the Australian Government in peace time would never make 
          proper arrangements for the Manus Island base, therefore the Americans 
          walked off the `anus Island base and established another one on their own 
          island of Guam. As a result, Australia lost a tremendous asset. This 
          event that took place in the late 1940's gave a jolt to American Australian 
          relationships. Shades of this hanus Island policy are now evident over 
          the Naval Communications Centre to be built at Learmonth in Western 
          Australia.




                      Eight members of the Opposition have, in recent years, said 
         .they want our defence vote reduced, or have implied that it is wasted. 
          Two of these eight have said there should be no Naval Communications Centre 
          in Western Australia. Last October the Australian Labour Party Federal 
          Executive passed a resolution which Ni", Les Haylen, front-bench member 
          from Sydney, said clearly meant the Australian Labour Party opposed the
          Radio Base.   This is also recorded in Hansard of late last year.


                      Mr. Calwell, recognising that outright opposition to the 
          Base would place the Australian Labour Party in an intolerable electoral 
          position and, to give him credit, I do not doubt that he also recognised 
          that it would place Australia in an intolerable position in our relationships 
          with the United States, asked that a special conference of the Australian 
          Labour Party be held to discuss foreign policy, in particular the Radio Base 
          issue.


                      The Federal Conference of the Australian Labour Party is the 
          supreme policy making and governing; body of the Party, It normally meets
          only once every two years.  It has full power over State Branches of the 
          Party and over.every Parliamentary member of the Party, Rule 10 of the 
          Australian Labour Party Federal Conference says in plain terms that the 
          decisions of the Conference shall be binding on all Parliamentary members 
          of the A.L.P. The Confercnce is composed of six members from each State. 
          The States have their own rules about the election of these delegates; it
          is unusual for politicians to be members of the Conference.   Mn. Calwell 
          is on record in hansard as having said all members of the Australian Labour 
          Party are bound by the platform of the Party.. It is the Conference not 
          the politicians of the Party that makes the rules and decides the Platform.


                      The most powerful man in the Conference is said to be Mr. 
          Chamberlain, Secretary of the Conference and Secretary of the A.L.P. in 
         Western Australia, It was Mn, Chamberlain who announced the results of the
          special conference called by Mr. Calwell,. Before the special Conference



                                                                              /2•

                                -  2 -

was held it was Mr. Chamberlain who is reported to have told Federal Labour 
members of Parliament not to talk about Foreign Policy and Defence issues. 
 It would seem that Moir. Chamberlain was, to some extent, usurping the 
functions that one would think belongs to the Parliamentary Leader of the 
Party - N.r. Calwell.

            With a strong Parliamentary Leader in the Labour Party the 
power of the Conference has been pushed aside. During the war Mr, Curtin 
had an argument with the Labour Party Conference of the day over conscription. 
Traditional A.L.P. polcy had been that conscripts could ohly serve inside 
Australia and that only volunteers could go beyond our-shores. Prime 
Minister Curtin knew this would make it impossible for Australia to prosecute 
her war effort effectively. He is reported to have laid his leadership on 
the line in the following terms:

            "If you don't authorise me to do what I kr .w to be in the best 
interests of Australia I will resign".

Mr. Curtin knew that it was necessary for Australian conscripts in the last 
war to serve beyond the shores of Australia. He won his point - as any 
strong leader should.

              Mr. Calwell knows the Naval Communications Centre in Ttstern 
Australia is as necessary to Australia's future defence as was Mr. Curtin's 
decision about conscription in the war. ìvh Calwell, however, behaved 
differently. He spoke to members of the Conference, he asked them to 
support the base. 15 of the 36 voted against having the Base under any 
conditions, 17 of them voted against having it even with the fairly stringent 
conditions the N.S.W. motion attached to it. The Conference decision only 
supported the Base by 19 votes to 17 because Mr. Duggan from Queensland 
refused to vote with his five other Queensland members. If it hadn't been 
for his vote Australian Labour Party policy. would have been against
co-operation with the United States in this matter. The margin of support 
for the base is therefore very small. There are reports that when the next 
biennial Federal Conference is held in Perth in June the decision will be 
changed.

            Mr, Calwell should have laid his leadership on the line in this 
issue as Mr. Curtin did over conscription. If he had he would have won the 
almost unanimous support of the Conference and of his Parliamentary colleagues, 
he would have deserved the admiration of the Australian people. He did not 
do this. He waited around the corridors of the Kingston Hotel until the
Conference made its decision late at night. He is apparently not prepared 
to challenge a rule that could make a weak Australian Labour Party Prime 
Minister subservient to an outside unconstitutional body owing no 
responsibility to the Australian Parliament or people.

            It is easy to see that this is a deep and fundamental issue which 
Australians have got to learn to face and the Australian Labour Party must
learn to face.  It is tragic that the Party that is the alternate Government 
is so divided on an issue that affects our security so greatly. We must ... 
hope that the A.L.P. Conference shortly to be held endorses the policy 
recently made by a much wider margin and with less stringent conditions
attached.   If this is done it may be possible to heed Mr. Calwell's plea 
not to make defence a political issue.

