<!--start metadata-->
Title: Protests, Vietnam
Description: radio talk
Date: c1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 RADIO TALK
       (By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon and Minister-for Defence)

        In a recent speech I spoke on dissent-and protest within
 Australia and made the point that some trends had emerged which gave
 some cause for concern. I said it was not the fact of dissent itself
'which caused this concern, because this was an inherent and necessary
 of democracy. The concern is caused by the nature of dissent, and the
 methods and techniques that it advocates and uses. I said dissent was
 now stepping outside the boundary of constitutional change, and that this
 must be exposed for what it was — an attempt to break down the constitutional
 mechanism and the democratic process of change.

        Since I made these remarks there has been some debate on the 
 issue — as well as fresh instances of violent protest, and the blatant 
!invasion of privacy by demonstrators at the home of the Attorney—General,
 Mr. Hughes.
        In a speech in Brisbane the other day the Leader of the
 Opposition, Mr. Whitlam, while admitting that demonstrations had been 
 numerous, sought to underplay their effect on law and order by adding that, 
 so far, they had,been "singularly non—violent."

        Perhaps we could take a quick look through the public newspaper 
 record to see how accounts measure up against the Labor Leader's words.
        April 11, 1969: More than 180 arrests were made during violent 
 demonstrations against conscription and the Vie,tnam war in Sydney and(
 Adelaide.
        May 1, 1969: The N.S.W. Governor Sir Roden Cutler was 
 jostled, abused and pelted with rotten vegetables and bottle tops


                                 ..../during

                                                                             2.


       during a student clash at Sydney University.

                            June 4, 1969: Demonstrators occupied the private office of 
       the Federal Attorney—General for more than an hour. They took over his 
       office during a demonstration against conscription.

                            July 4, 1969: Thousands of demonstrators fought with police 
      around the U.S. Consulate in Melbourne. What began as a peaceful 
      demonstration against the war in Vietnam ended•in a very ugly incident.

                            July 24,1969: Anti—conscription demonstrators hurled smoke
      bombs, blocked city traffic and occupied parts of three Commonwealth
      buildings in Melbourne. They took over the G.P.O. in Elizabeth Street,   _                                                                            ì
      the Department of Labour and National Service and the Combined Services; 
      Recruiting Centre. The demonstrators also disrupted postal services 
      and ripped up private papers in the Labour and National Service office.


                           I could go on — as I said, it was a quick look. This year we 
      have had a similar story — anti—war demonstrators held up the Gippsland4r
      Express at Caulfield Station                                         Federal Attorney—General Hughes is 
      involved in a scuffle with demonstrators who hammered on his door and
      tried to force their way into his home on a Sunday afternoon. His 
      children are terr.ified....police struggle with 30 demonstrators in a                                                                                pI 
      Melbourne court after a magistrate ordered his court be cleared...One 
      of the members of Parliament reminded us that fire bombs had been throw
      into a company's office in Melbourne. Shots were fired into another                                                                                  1
      building. Demonstrators set a fire on the floor of the Melbourne                                                                                     j
      Stock Exchange. These all come from newspapers. They are a matter 
      of public record.


                           Perhaps those-._instances might give some idea of the "non— 
rviolence" of protest. Apart from.the threat of injury, incidents




                                                                                          ..../involving

4



                       3.
      involving violence raise the question of interference with the right of 
      individuals and with the flow of commercial and business life. The 
      private citizen has a right to go about his business unimpeded by the 
      disruption of violent demonstrations. _
     1     The demonstrations have been aimed at two things - national 
      service and the Vietnam War. I have explained the need for national 
      service and why I believe there is no alternative-if Australia is to 
      have the forces sh'e requires. The demonstrators - and the Labor Party - 
      want to scrap the system, and at one stroke reduce the Army by one-third.

           Opponents of the Government's policies are entitled to their 
      views, to work for them, to advocate them as hard as they can. Protest
     1 through the proper channels is part of our democratic way of life. It 
      is how this present protest is being carried out, that is causing concern. 
      There are those who ignore the normal processes of democratic change, 
      who seek to overthrow the law providing for national service by breaking 
      the law or advocating that._ others break that law. These are not now 
      merely restricted to the radical-extremist fringe. They include members 
      of the Parliamentary Labor Party, of the Labor Party's outside organisatidn, 
      and others.

           There are those who genuinely hold conscientious objection to 
      military service. I can understand and I can respect this. It has long
     ibeen in Australia's tradition that there is room for conscientious 
      objection for those who have a genuine conscientious belief against 
      bearing arms. The procedures are well established. The judgment is made 
      in court and there is room for appeal on matters of law and on matters 
      of belief. Recently the Government acted to widen the opportunity for 
      claims of conscientious objection td be-tës£eq-IéTóre the Cbuf s:


                             .../At the

                                       4.

At the moment some men refuse to undertake military service and claim 
conscientious objection or that the Act is morally wrong but refuse to 
go to the court to have their claim tested. The changes to the Act 
include giving power to the Minister for Labour and National Service 
to refer cases to the courts.

             I said in my speech that Australia is not America, but some of the 
same signs o_f dis-content are evident, some of the same signs of disillusion 
and of violence can be depicted in Australia. We should never be so bold 
as to take the naive and smug view that-what has happened in other countries 
cannot occur in Australia. We hear people in Australia, not only from the 
radical fringe, including Members of.Parliament, advocating defiance of 
the law. We have heard Dr. Cairns, an organiser of the Moratorium parades, 
calling for demonstrators to occupy the streets,with the intention of
bringing commercial and industrial life to 'a halt. In those parades
marched many people who abhor war and who genuinely and sincerely yearn 
for peace. We all want peace - but peace that will contribute to the 
stability of the region. Many of those organising the Moratorium have not 
sought to march against aggression in Cambodia. They condemn only the
attempts to protect South Vietnam.             These are the people who say they
want peace, but who really want and work for a North Vietnamese victory
in Vietnam. And an aura of respectability is given to the Communist
Party by the support generally given by the Labor Party for such activities
as the moratorium.: There is, we are told, to be another one some time this
month. Dr. Cairns, the Labor M.P. from Victoria, has just,returned from
overseas after inviting anti-war leaders iii America to visit Australia
for it and take. part. Dr. Cairns expressed the hope that North Vietnamese -
Madam Binh, their Paris negotiator - and Viet Cong representatives would
come here also. This development must have come to many Australians with the
same shock as the statement in the Senate by Senator Wheeldon that he
bat ed the Viet Cong in the war. rJne might ask - where are the demonstrations
over the North Vietnamese aggression in Cambodia? Where is the indignation,/the

                  f•
P
 •                   5.
      the protest at this invasion which was denounced in such bitter terms 
      by the Victorian Labor Member Mr. Gordon Bryant? Where are the marchers 
      decrying the North Vietnamese slaughter of children at the orphanage 
      at An Hoa in Vietnam a few days ago?

           It seems that some now take the view that there is no wrong 
      unless Australian, American or allied troops are involved. There cannot 
      be any wrong if North Vietnamese forces are involved no matter what the 
      situation. The attitude shown in these affairs must give, I believe, 
      the great majority of Australians very real cause for concern.
                                       •

                            September 6th and 10th 1970

