<!--start metadata-->
Title: Premiers' Conference
Description: electoral talk
Date: 16/08/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   EMBARGOED 5.00 PM




           --~j~AUST~J.




       PRIME MINISTER




FOR MEDIA        SUNDAY, 16 AUGUST 1981

           ELECTROATE TALK


Last week I spoke to you about the nature of the meetings to 
be held during this week with employers, the Australian 
Council of Trade Unions and with the Premiers. Among other 
things, I suggested that too much should not be expected of 
the meetings - that if we only succeeded in achieving-, a better 
understanding of where we all stood, of our roles and responsibilities 
in the post-indexation period that alone would be a significant 
achievement at this time. I believe that the results of the 
meetings,of the thinking and of the talking that went on among 
all participants in preparation for them, contained many more 
positive elements than has so far been acknowledged by media 
commentators.

In particular, the meeting with the Premiers resulted in a 
joint statement by all Governments which offers constructive 
basis for future developments in the wages and industrial 
relations area, a statement which received less media 
attention than it deserves.

The first, and most important thing to be said is that all 
parties to the meetings agreed that the initial community 
reactions to the abandonment of the wage indexation system 
overlooked the fact that there is a fully functioning wage 
determination system, a system that remains in operation, and 
which is capable of providing for the fair and orderly treatment 
of legitimate wage claims now that indexation has gone. Central 
to that system is the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission 
which has statutory obligations not merely to seek to resolve 
industrial disputes, but also to consider wages and other 
industrial claims in the light of the interests of the community 
as a whole, and to take into account the state of the economy, 
especially inflation and employment. The Commission will 
hear claims that are put to it, and will assess those claims 
in terms of its own responsibilities.

It was agreed at the meetings this week,and especially at the 
special Premiers' Conference, that it would help in re-establishing 
the system of hearing individual industry pay claims if a major 
industry claim could be dealt with soon, so that the guidelines 
to be used by the Commission in handling individual cases could 
be established, and a possible source of uncertainty removed. 
The Premiers also asked the Confederation of Australian Industry 
and Australian Council of Trade Unions to agree to consider 
how claims currently being made could be brought forward in an 
orderly and equitable manner, and so that the interests of lower 
paid, less industrially strong sections of the workforce would 
be given protection.

              2


The fact that all of the meetings confirmed a strong commitment 
to Australia's centralised wage determination system offers the 
best possible prospect for ensuring that stability prevails. 
In one sense, of course, to talk of our system as centralised. 
is to overlook the fact that each state has a separate tribunal 
for dealing -with state awards.

It was agreed among the Premiers that orderly processing of 
wage claims, and fair and consistent treatment of employees 
throughout Australia requires that Commonwealth and state 
tribunals should develop consistent procedures, and the 
Commonwealth and all state Governments have asked the presidents 
of their tribunals to meet urgently to work towards this 
objective, and to eliminate the dangers of state-by-state 
leap-frogging of pay claims.

Individual industry cases are not the only form of wage case 
that will occur under the new circumstances. In announcing 
its decision to abandon wage indexation,-the Arbitration Commission 
stated a national wage case would be held in 1982, in which 
general economic conditions would be considered. The Commonwealth 
and state Governments, in another important decision, committed 
themselves to work towards the establishment of agreed
principles that might be put to this national wage case. All 
Ministers for Labour have been asked to meet soon to commence 
this task. All of these decisions, and the expressions of 
attitudes which emerged in the course of the week,provide 
proof of the willingness of all participants to recognise their 
responsibilities in the wage determination process;- to recognise 
that the benefits of economic growth should be distributed 
across the whole community, not just to the large and 
powerful whether businesses or unions; to recognise, therefore, 
that there are limits to growth of wages possible in any one 
year.

For its part, the Commonwealth Government informed all participants 
of its view that its role in the new circumstances would be 
limited to involvement in major cases, such as the national wage 
 cases, cases involving claims for reduced-standard hours, and 
major industry test cases. There is, I believe, a clear 
understanding now emerging that the Commonwealth's ability 
 to control wages is limited in constitutional terms, and 
 practical terms. There are. indirect means of control through 
 the Government's influence over the economic climate. These 
 can be exerted through the Budget, monetary and fiscal policies, 
 tariffs, and the exchange rate. These can be used in developing 
 a general economic framework designed to boost the growth of 
 the economy while acting as a counter against excessive wage 
 expectations. In any event, we have never sought to control 
 wages, but rather to seek to ensure that wage growth is consistent 
 with sustained improvements in the standard of living.

 With the spirit of co-operation revealed at the meetings 
 this week,and a continued willingness to make the system work, 
 the prospect for stable industrial relations, and
 attainment of those sustained improvements in living standards, 
 is substantial indeed.


            ---o0o---

