<!--start metadata-->
Title: Sheep vaccinations, wool industry
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 24/10/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               RADIO BROADCAST
               Hello Ladies and Gentlemen
               (This is Malcolm Fraser in Canberra)


                                          estozoit is my leasu
               mace that vaccines against footrot in sheep,
               developed after pioneering research by this organisation, 
               will be available in Victoria next month.

                    These vaccines appear to offer a simple solution 
               against footrot which, as we know only too well, has 
               caused serious economic and management problems in 
               the sheep industry for many years.

                   ( Anything which does away with the need for 
                foot paring is certainly a step forward ).

                   The vaccines will be made available under
                expanded field trial conditions. This means they 
                will be provided only on prescrition from Government 
                veterinarians on a whole flock basis to graziers prepared 
                to pay the purchase cost, which is I believe about 25 to 30
                cents per injection.

                   Extensive field trials by the Department of Agriculture 
~               clearly indicates that in the majority of cases footrot 
                infection can be greatly reduced.

                    Any infection developing in vaccinated sheep is 
                restricted in most cases to a very mil form which 
                heals quickly without local treatment, even under 
                conditions where un—vaccinated sheep become severely
                affected.

                                          Broadcast ... 2


                  On one trial farm where results were less satisfaci 
               a different strain of bacteria to that used in vacci-ation
               was isolated. Thisivas not unexpected and suggested 
               that further strains may have to be incorporated to 
               improve efficiency.


                  km Although the vaccines to be marketed in Australia 
                   now produced by commercial firms the advent of 
                  ootrot cure is another outstanding result of
               research add development by the CSIRO.


                  Scientists of thisx organisation were the first to 
               discover that the invading organisms which cause footrot
~
               were susceptible to treatment by blood-borne antibiotics.


                  Thisshowed that an injected vaccine was feasible. 
               The CSIRO then developed a method of culturing the 
               causal bacteria in the laboratory, an essential first 
               step before mass production.


                  This stage was reached in 1969 and since that 
               date a number of commercial firms* have been developing 
               and testing Vaccines.


 •                Provided these continue to be effective under general
               usage footrot an become a much less-costly and time-consuming 
               problem.


                  The CSIRO deserves the highest commendation for the 
               development of this new vaccine.


                  Still on the subject of sheep ....

 i              DRAFT RADIO BROADCAST              For Oct.24.





                With the wool deficiency scheme soon to swing into 
                operation, guaranteeing a minimum price of 36 cents 
                a pound, the question of reducing costs to improve 
                profitability becomes even more pertinent.


                It' s in this light that the recently completed 
                investigation into thecosts of Wool Transport in 
                Australia by the Australian Wool Board assume 
                great significance.


                This report, released this month, highlights the way 
•               transport restrictions add to producer's costs ... in 
                fact the Tool Board has found that the industry is 
                forced to spend six-and-a-half-million dollars a year 
                more on transport than it would if there were no 
                restrictions.


                At the present time it costs an average of two dollars 
                80 cents per bale to transport wool from the farm to
                the broker's store. This represents a total cost 

                of nearly 15 and a half million dollars a year.


                If there was free competition between road and rail 
•               transport, the total cost would be reduced to just 
                under nine-million-dollars ... a saving of six and a 
                half million dollars to growers.


                There is quite a variation in transport costs throughout 
                Australia. In Queensland it is as high as five dollars 
                a bale, while in Tasmania the average is 95 cents per bale.


                For Victoria the average cost of transport is 
                l-point 69 dollars per bale.

                                                 Broadcast ... 2



 •
                An important feature of the Wool Board's report 
                as far as Western Victoria is concerned is the great 
                increase in the amount of wool sold at Portland which 
                could be envisaged if there were no transport restrictions.


                At the present time Portland seals about two-hundred- 
                and eleven-thousand bales a year, compared to more than 
                one-million in Melbourne and four hundred and forty-five- 
                thousand in Geelong.


                Under what the board calls "perfectly competitive" 
                conditions, the amount of wool sold in Portland
                could be expected to rise from two-hundred-and eleven 
•               thousand to three-hundred and 67-thousand bales, .. almost 
                double.


                Melbourne could be expected to drop fmmmx2xxxx to 
                four-hundred-and-ten-thousand and Geelong 367-thousand.


                However the board points out that under "Optimal Conditions" 
                with reference to where the wool is grown, Portland 
                should handle five-hundred-and-fifty-three-thousand 
                bales a year.


                But the vexed question of shipping movements is again 
•               highlighted as one of the main factors retarding Portland's 
                growth as a wool sekling centre. In the 12 months to May 
                this year , 89-percent of all wool sold in Portland was 
                moved out by rail ... mainly to Melbourne.


                         ainly    ost un





                         t,--~-/

                               "f,tit-...•et-e.  1,44/( 04-

                 C"'"~;.:.`tt~

                                                 3D


  (77friz/11-    0,e,t &fie 74:i
                  ,/zux_                                         •



                                                                 •

-

