<!--start metadata-->
Title: Higher education
Description: press statement
Date: 16/05/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STA.TENENT :

NiALCOLN FRASER :

                                                  r.'ay 16th,1965


                           "HIGHER EDUCATION"

                Some time ago the report of the Martin Committee on 
tertiary education. was made public and the Commonwealth made its position 
known on the major recommendations of the report. These recommendations 
are of far reaching significance. They have been acce t ed by the Common- 
wealth and if they are accepted by the States or by a majority of the 
States they will influence the pattern of education beyond the secondary 
school level for many years ahead.

                Let me explain what the Commonwealth is supporting. 
Higher education in Australia has largely developed on two levels; we 
have the traditional pattern in Australian Universities like Melbourne 
or Nonash, and then we have technical colleges which supply a very 
important but different need - these train the technicians and tech- 
nologists who are needed in an ever increasing number in a modern
industrial country. In general, their education has only gone to a 
diploma level although the Victorian Parliament has introduced legislation 
to raise technical colleges to degree giving institutions.

                This traditional pattern of education is under pressure 
for two reasons. A much larger number of people are seeking higher 
education - this is not only because there are more people in each age 
group but also because a higher percentage of people in the age group 
are seeking higher education, This is a trend that will continue.

                The present institutions are also under pressure 
because of the very high failure rate. 40% of matriculants fail at 
universities and a gread number do not pass in the minimum time. This 
suggests that many people find their way to universities who have
difficulty in coping with university standards. There would be many ways 
of trying to overcome these pressures, e.g., traditional universities 
have been expanded and new universities are being built, but more needs 
to be done and the expansion of universities on the trnlltional pattern does 
not solve the question of the failure rate and the wastage it involves.

                The Martin Committee's solution to these problems is to 
buil4ón the existing technical colleges, to expand the courses available 
to include the arts, histories and the humanities. The Committee suggests 
that these courses at this stage should be confined to diploma level.

                If the States also endorse this proposal it could mean 
that only the better matriculants will go •:• a first step to a university, 
other matriculants will be able to go to t'hcse new look technical colleges 
and there study for a diploma; If theiY wcrk at such a college warrants 
it they would be able to go on from the college to the university where 
they will be given proper credit for, work done at the technical college 
in whatever course they have chosen, The Committee did not recommend that 
such new look colleges should award degrees at this particular point of 
time and the Commonwealth's financial assistance would be to the diploma 
level only.

                The Committee recommended that an Institute of Colleges
should be established by the States to guard the standards of these new
look technical colleges. It would have other important functions however.
It would have to see that there was appropriate access or transferability
between these new look colleges and the universities. We must avoid the
sort of circumstances in which the university gives an undue emphasis to its
own undergraduates rather than allowing a proper number of places for students
from these colleges. The scheme will fail if this aspect is not watched closely.

                                                            /2.

                                   — 2


                   These new technical colleges will help the weaker 
matriculant, they will assist him in overcoming the gap in changes and 
methods of study between the secondary level and the university. They
will help the late de-;eloping student.   They will also increase the 
number of people who will want some higher education, because it is 
likely that there are a number of people who do not want a purely 
technical or technological course which is available at the technical 
colleges, but who are now daunted. by a full university course. Such a 
person might well be attracted to a diploma course in the arts, or history 
at these new look colleges. Thus, what we are doing will open new 
opportunities for higher education and, in so doing, more people than ever 
will be attracted to it.

                   The Government's purpose is to make an appropriate form 
of higher education available to all those who would benefit from it. 
These new proposals should go a long way towards achieving this end:
                         •
                   These new look colleges will, in many ways, be similar 
to the many junior colleges in the United States which generally provide a 
wide range of education opportunities over a two year period to. a diploma 
standard. Successful students at such junior colleges in America then go 
on to do a full degree course if they so wish Indeed, it would aopear 
that the Committee in making its recommendations has borrowed quite heavily 
from American experience. It has also been. strongly influenced by those 
institutions that are already existing in Australia, and that is why it is 
proposed to develop the existing technical colleges rather than to 
establish completely new institutions. This proposal, and the Commonwealth s 
assistance, represent another significant step forward in the widening of 
educational opportunities in Australia.


                               -----o Go

