<!--start metadata-->
Title: Meat
Description: press statement
Date: 12/04/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           P:LÏZS STATKEP1T- 

           PALCOLlv: FHASLit

                                                                    April 12th, 1964



                                            h E T


                             A short time ago, at the request of the Australian 
           Wool Growers & Graziers' Council and the Australian Wool and heat 
           Producers' Federation, the minister for Primary Industry introduced a 
           Bill into the Parliament to re-constitute the Australian heat Board 
           and to extend the powers of the heat Board.

                             The new heat Board will be given powers over beef, 
           veal, mutton and lamb.

                             The re-constitution of the heat Board needs to be 
           looked at against a background of expanding production inside Australia
           and against changing world mï:.rkets. In 1;+57/55 exports of the meats I 
          mentioned totalled under 150,000 tons, but in the last financial year 
           over 320,000 tons were shipped abroad. The increase is really much 
           greater than the figures would give you to understand, because in the 
           earlier years most meat was shipped abroad on the bone, and now a very 
ï         high proportion is shipped with the bones taken out, thus there is a
          higher percentage of meat in the tonnage.   It has been estimated (to 
          use a word that has been coined by some Department) that the "bone-in" 
          weight equivalent of exports last year totalled just on 500,000 tons, 
          and that this is the proper comparison to make with the earlier figure 
          I mentioned.

                            The major pert of our meat exports used to go to the 
          United Kingdom under the Australia-United Kingdom heat Agreement.
          Britain was, in any case, our traditional major market for beef, mutton 
          and lamb. However, in the past several years, there has been a reduction 
          in the amounts we sell to Britain and a very great increase in our exports
          to the United States.   Last year 81% of all our beef went to the United 
          States and over 50% of our mutton. These figures highlight the import- 
          ance of the new legislation and, very largely, the reasons for it.

                            We have a tremendous proportion of our exports in one 
          market. The rate of increase of our exports to the United States has 
          given rise to concern amongst American cattle-men. The Australian 
          Authorities argue that we do not compete directly with the American 
          producer because he is producing animals that go into the feed lots and 
          the quality of the beef produced is something which we don't see in 
          Australia. The very great proportion of our exports goes into what they 
          call manufacturing processes to make hamburgers, and the old dry and 
          possibly stringy beef from Queensland is ideal for this purpose. 
          Incidentally, this is also the main reason why we get high prices for old
          bulls.   They also find their way into American hamburgers.

                            There has been pressure on the American Congress to 
          reduce our exports to the United. States, and recently the Government 
          has been able to negotiate an agreement with the American administration 
          which will give us continued access to the American harket on a basis that
          is most satisfactory to Australia and fair to tmerica.   However, this is, 
          unfortunately, election year in the United States, and the prices of the 
          types of beef that they have been producing for themselves have fallen, 
          and there is a strong tendency to blame Australian imports. This does 
          not really seem to be a logical argument because the price for the type 
          of beef that we send to the United States has been firming. The


                                                                            /2

.,






                                             2




          American administration, however, is going to have a battle with its 
          own Congress to prevent arbitrary restrictions being placed on Australian 
          meat exports to the United States.

                            We are fortunate in that in this year our exports to 
          the United States will be less than the quota under the Agreement. This 
          is largely due to the fact that additional markets have become available 
          in the United Kingdom and in other European countries, notably France 
          and Greece, and at the same time they are now paying prices for some 
          meats higher than those available in the United States., It is, never- 
          theless, clearly dangers to have so much of our exports placed in one 
          market.

                            Because of the new markets in Europe it may well be 
          that the Meat Board will not have to use its increased powers for some 
          time. There is one circumstance, however, in which the Meat Board may
          need to use its powers to the full.  If there were a drought in the 
          United States, affecting large parts of their cattleraising territory, 
          their cattle numbers could fall by two or three or even four million in 
          a very short space of time. American cattlemen would be sending their 
          surplus and aged cows to market in great numbers and this slaughtering 
          would compete directly with meat from Australia. Under these circum- 
          stances I would hope that Australia would voluntarily keep more meat out
          of the American market.   If this did not happen I believe that under 
          such circumstances much heavier quotas would be imposed. This, however, 
          would be on a short-term basis pending the breaking of the drought and 
          a new build-up in American cattle numbers. Once this occurred of 
          course the demand for our beef would be greater than ever. The problem 
          would remain as to what we should do with the great quantity of export 
          beef from Australia during a period of American drought when their own 
          slaughterings would flood a market normally supplied from Australia. I 
          am quite certain that the traditional Australian exporters would be active 
          in seeking new markets. They now export to over seventy countries. 
          However, these exporters would not have a great deal of interest in 
          trying to push meat into a market on a temporary basis just to get rid 
          of surplus beef and mutton. They may prefer, and it may suit them
          better, to let the meat go on the Australian market. If this occurred, 
          and a position of over-supply developed inside Australia, the fall in
          beef prices could be catastrophic.  It would be the new Neat Board's 
          intention to prevent this happening by trying to get access to new
          markets overseas in this kind of circumstance. It may be, of course,
          that a drought of the kind I have mentioned will not occur in the 
          United States for many years, but if it should occur Australians should 
          be ready and should be prepared to hold their meat out of the United 
          States market to maintain goodwill and future access to our best 
          customer.




                                            000

