<!--start metadata-->
Title: Karmel Committee, education
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 2/12/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                              —13/19





            THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.    Sunday, 2nd December, in 3HA
            RADIO BROADCAST.                 Thursday, 6th December 3YB




            The Prime Minister is trying to perpetuate a confidence
            trick in what he is now saying and doing about education 
            and the Karmel Committee funds. The Prime Minister has
            tried to suggest that the Opposition is opposing the 
            allocation of funds in the Government legislation 
            which would implement the Karmel Committee proposals. 
•           This is completely false - it is untrue. We have 
            supported and voted to support every cent of the 
            expenditure of $694m included in the Government's 
            legislation. We have voted to support the expenditure 
            of that money to advantage Australian schools in 
            precisely the way that the Government wants and the 
            Prime Minister cannot sustain the view that the 
            Oppositions Parties are opposing and obstructing 
            that legislation. It is false. We support the 
            expenditure as the Governmentx wants to spend that 
            money.

            The Prime Minister was tryi í to suggest that the 
•           Opposition is opposing -e legislation. Our votes 
            in the Parliament de • that. We have voted to support
            these aspects of e legislation. We supported the 
            expenditure, w- supported it wholeheartedly.

            This is the second confidence trick that the Prime 
            Minister has sought to perpetuate in this issue. 
            On 2nd May, 1972, on 20th June, 1972, and on 13th 
            December, .t$2- after the election - he gave certain 
            assurances to many people and ikRx, as a result of 
            those assurances, it was strongly believed that the 
            Australian Labor Party would continue to enforce 
            the support for schools that had beOn introduced by 
            the previous Government. We knew that the Labor Party

                                2 -



           would introduce additional proposals but everyone was 
           led to believe that what this new Government was 
           going to do would be additional afnd lac d on top
           of the proposals that we had .'" he statements 
           of the Prime Minister on 1,.ay 2nd before 4,000 people 
           at the Festival Hall, on June 20th axri at a Men's 
           Catholic Luncheon Club in Melbourne in particular 
           led to that conclusion. I have copies of the 
           statements. I have a tape of the Prime Minister's 
 •         tape on 2nd May so there is no doubt that these 
           statements were made.


           The media tends to remain silent about the Prime 
           Minister's broken promises, but the record is there.


           We have taken the action we have in the House of 
           Representatives - and there will be similar action 
           in the Senate - because we believe that it is right. 
           We believe that there ought to be basic support for 
           all children in all schools and indeed the Minister 
           for Education himself, Mr. Beazley, has said, and 
           is on record in the Parliament as having said, that 
•          he would like to see the Commonwealth identify itself 
           with the education of every child including children 
           even at Geelong Grammar. We need to understand that 
           the Government's present proposals would make sure 
           that secondary independent schools from Categories 
           A to F would get less mutabax under the Government's 
           propoeals than they would have under the previous 
           legislatiorLat 1 ,ur proposals would hapao.t, only lift 
           those who get léssst.o a basic level of support which 
           would then help them to plan and look after their 
           own future. 0u--proposals were that children in 
           all indep/ndent schools should get 205 of the cost 
           of education in Government primary or secondary 
           schools, and ttAt as those costs rose, that 20% would


                                                     ...13

            naturally increase to a certain extent. That would 

            have given them basic support. On top of that, 

            we accept and believe that thosw with particular 

            disabilities and hardships should get additional 

            support and we would want that to take place 

            precisely as the Karmel Committee recommends.



            Last year, Mr. t^dhitlam must have believed that these 

            policies were also right because of the pledges 

            he gave. We want him to keep his word. To meet 

•           the Oppositions views and to keep the Prime Minister's 
            word would cost an additional $5m a year. Does anyone 

            really believe that the Labor Party would want to 

            jeopardise a $694m programme for the sake of that 

            $5m-?-~--I think that thtat is a nonsensical proposalx

            azaâ the Prime Minister an only get away with this 
                               r
            outrageous situation he can have people believe

            that we, the Opposition, have opposed the $694. 

            He can't get away with that because we support it 

            and support it wholeheartedly and have voted to 

            support it.



            Mr. t`Ihitlam and the Australian Labor Party will not
•           be able to perpetuate that falsehood - that we are

            holding up these funds. We voted for them, we will

            vote for them again. If the legislation is not

            proclaimed, if it is not put into effect, it will

            be the fault of the present Labor Government.

            The unfortunate part about all of this is that

            the Prime Minister is playing politics with the

            fortunes of schools, with the fortunes of school children

            in a immoral and shameful manner.

