<!--start metadata-->
Title: New aircraft for army aviation
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 17/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         .Sent to Papers ; Freeth; White; Lehmann, McKellar

                              DJO 18/5/


FOR PRESS                          No. 4866

              NEW AIRCRAFT FOR ARMY AVIATION
             Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
              the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.

    The Army is to spend an estimated $2'/-million to purchase 12 turbo-prop 
light aircraft within the next 12 months.
    Announcing this today, the Minister for the Army, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, said 
the Army had an immediate requirement for additional light fixed wing aircraft to 
supplement the small number of Cessnas now in service.
    In conjunction with Department of Air the Army had conducted a complete 
evaluation of the most suitable aircraft available in Australia, U.S.A., United 
Kingdom and Europe.
    The turbine engined Pilatus Porter, designed in Switzerland specifically 
for short take-off and landing (STOL) operations in the Swiss Alps, was found to 
be the only machine suitable to meet all of the Army's requirements.
    Included in the overall costs of the project were spare engines, avionics, 
spare parts, ground handling equipment and training aids.
    The first Pilatus would be in service before the end of 1967 and the 
remainder by May next year.
    The new aircraft would increase the capability of the Army in its recognised 
roles of reconnaissance, observation, and emergency supply and casualty evacuation.
    The Pilatus had excellent STOL performance and exceptional slow speed 
handling characteristics.
    It was a simple, rugged, high-wing monoplane with fixed landing gear. It 
could take-off within 100 yards and land in 70 yards.
    In its Army role the single-L;ngine Pilatus would have a normal all-up 
weight of 4850 lbs, would cruise at 120 knots, and if required could carry up to 
seven passengers.

                        Lists: A and B
                        Further information:
                   CANBERRA: Major Allan S. Hinds
                         (65-4061) (49-6030)
                 OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

17 May 1967

