<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1963/64 Budget
Description: press statement
Date: 25/08/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


      PRESS STATEMENT:

      NiALCOLN FRASER:

                                                              August 25th,1963

                                   1963/64 BUDGET

                       The Budget announced by the Treasurer has been better received 
      than any previous Budget introduced by Mir. Holt. One principle has been 
      adopted in the Budget which I believe is particularly commendable. The Govern- 
      ment has tried to pick out those sections of the community that need some help
      or assistance and it has then given particular aid to those groups. Thus, 
      the Budget has been able to have a broad effect on many different sections of 
      the community.

                       In the past, there has often been a tendency to give a blanket 
      reduction in taxation or in company tax, or a blanket increase in benefits. 
      Such reductions in taxation or increases in Government expenditure covering the 
      whole field have always been very expensive. These general deductions have not 
      always given the Australian people the best value for their money. The partic- 
      ular incentives and the particular concessions announced in this Budget are, I 
      believe, much more useful.

                       In this first report on the Budget, I am going to deal with
      those aspects that give a direct stimulus to production in the rural sphere.
      In later reports, I will deal with other aspects of the Budget.

      SUPERPHOSPHAIL BOUNTY.

                       The most important of the concessions involves the introduction 
      of a Superphosphate Bounty at the rate of £3. a ton. In a full financial year, 
      this will cost £9m.

                       There is no need to tell anyone in this part of Victoria how 
      beneficial superphosphate has been to the development of the whole region. 
      Without super. Western Victoria would largely become unproductive. It is the 
      lifeblood of every farm and every property in this extremely productive area of 
      Australia, and what applies in Wannon applies in many other areas throughout the 
      Australia. The Superphosphate Bounty is something that mark-_ Members of
      Parliament have fought for for a considerable period. In advocating such a 
      Bounty, we have always kept foremost in mind the fact that a Superphosphate 
      Bounty would assist those primary industries that most need assistance. Surveys 
      made by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics have shown that the outback pastoral
ï     areas of Queensland or New South Wales or South Australia have always been 
      reasonably profitable even in the worst years of low wool prices. The same 
      surveys have shown that the high rainfall areas, the highly productive areas 
      where intensive grazing and farming operations are involved, have been the high 
      cost areas where profitability has not been all that good. One of the reasons 
      for this is the necessity to put large quantities of super. on our country every
      year.   Thus, the Government decided to subsidise super. and reduce the cost of 
      one of the most important annual expenditures that nearly every farmer in the 
      high rainfall areas must undertake.

                       I hope there will be many farmers who will take this opportunity 
      of cheaper availability of super. to improve more land and thus further increase 
      prodtic,tion.

      INVESTNÌENT ALLOWANCE

                       Secondly, the Government has introduced an investment allowance
      on plant and equipment.   The special depreciation allowance of 2C% of cost 
      being an allowable deduction every year for 5 years will continue. However, in 
      addition to this, the Government is introducing an investment allowance of a 
      further 20% for the first year in which new plant or equipment other than road
      vehicles is purchased.  In practical terms, this means that if you buy a new


                                                                          /2.

                                      2   ..

    hay baler or another piece of equipment you can write off 40% of its value in 
    the first year. Thus, the primary producer, over 5 years, can write off 120% 
    of the value of the equipment he purchased. It is estimated that this will 
    cost the Government £3m. in a full year.

    DEVELOPMENT BANK.

              A further £5m. has been provided towards the capital of the Common- 
    wealth Development Bank. Since its establishment, this Bank has approved loans 
    of primary and secondary industry but mostly to primary industry of the order of
    £37m.    This additional £5m. will increase the Bank's capital to £31m. but the
    Bank also has substantial reserve funds and the use of loan funds from other 
    sources. The total resources available to the Bank will be approximately £7nm.

    ES TATE~,:DUTY .

              The Government has also made significant alterations to estate duty. 
    The combihed probate and estate duties levied by the State and Federal Govern- 
    ments have caused embarrassment at times to many farmers and to people with 
    small businesses. Some time ago, the Victorian Government altered its 
    legislation so that there would be a 30% rebate on all agricultural land in- 
    cluded in deceased estates. The Commonwealth - I believe rightly - has come 
    to the view that farmers are not the only people who experience difficulty with
! estate duty and therefore rather than give a particular concession to agricultural 
    land, the Commonwealth decided that it would be more equitable to double all the 
    existing exemptions and to shade them out more slowly than at present. Once 
    the Commonwealth legislation has been passed, an estate of a person who dies 
    will be exempt from estate duty if the value is £10,000 or less and if that 
    estate passes to a widow, widower, children or grandchildren. Previously, 
    duty would have been payable if the estate were of a value greater than £5,000. 
    In addition to this, the exemptions will be shaded out much more gradually than 
    they have been up to the present time. Let me give one or two examples. An 
    estate valued at £10,000 will now attract no Commonwealth duty provided it is 
    being left to a widow, widower, children or grandchildren. An estate valued 
    at £20,000 will have the Commonwealth duty payable reduced by about 65%. An 
    estate valued at £30,000 will have the Commonwealth duty reduced by about 33%.

    FORESTRY.

              There are other matters which are of importance to the rural section 
    of the community. For taxation purposes forestry has been re-classified as a 
    primary industry. As a result, investment for forestry will be subject to tile 
ï   same investment allowance as other primary industries. This will be of
    particular significance many areas of Australia including certain particular 
    areas of Western Victoria,

    EDUCATION.

              The increase in the education a1'_owence should also be a help to people 
    who live in the remoter regions. The maximum amount deductible for any one 
    child has been increased from £100 to £150. This is designed in particular to 
    assist people who cannot send their children to a High School or a Grammar School 
    on a daily basis.

    TE TFPH 7, EXTENSIONS.

              There is one other small item which will be a help to people who live 
    a reasonable dietanee away from Post Offices. Up to the present time, the cost 
    of provisions made for the extension of telephone services to farm properties 
    has not been an allowable taxation deduction. Nov, in each year, one-tenth 
    of the cost of such works will be allowable till the item is written off in 
    10 year e. time. It hae always seemed unreasonable to me that primary producers 
    some distance from a Post Office should have had to spend sometimes large sums



                                                                    /3.

                  3


  of money in getting themselves connected to a telephone, and that such 
  expenditure was not an allowable taxation deduction. Once this Budget is 
  passed, such expenses will be allowable deductions.

          In short, this is the best Budget for the primary 
  producer for several years.

          Next week I will report on other aspects of the Budget.




                  o0o


ï

















ï

