<!--start metadata-->
Title: Two constitutional amendments - numbers of House and Senate, Aboriginal rights
Description: press statement
Date: 5/12/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATELIZOT :

IiALCO.LTl. FRASER :
                                                  December 5th,1965


                   TWO COAISTITUTIONAL ALÌENDÏ ÔE%dTS

            NU .IB~RS OF THE HOUSE ,OF a artES ITTATIV S AND TIIE SENATE
         AND AÏ ENDi I T CONCERNING ABORIGINAL RIGHTS.

            A short time ago the Prime Ïïinister introduced two Bills involving 
two small but important Constitutional amendments for which it is the Govern- 
ment's intention to seek the support of the people some time next year.

            The first Bill is designed to break what is called the nexus 
between the House of Representatives and the Senate. This is a clause in 
the Constitution which says that the House of Representatives shall be, as 
nearly as practicable, twice the size of the Senate.

            This restriction places severe limitations on what can be done
with the numbers in the House of Representatives. It, in fact, means that 
if it is desired to have an increase in membership for practical reasons, 
while the connection with the Senate remains, that increase must be an 
extravagantly large one.

            In 1949, the House of Representatives was increased from 74 to 
122 members and the Senate was increased from 36 to 60. At this time, each 
member of the House of Representatives represented about 66,000 people. Today, 
each member represents about 94,000 people.

            There is a limit to the extent to whichihe number of people in an 
electorate can be increased without reducing the quality and calibre of the 
service that a member can give to each constituent, and this is especially so 
since the scope and complexity of Government is growing year by year and what 
the Government does seem to touch the lives of people more nearly than in the
,past.

            We hope that Australia will continue to grow and I hope that, in 
my lifetime, I will see an Australia of at least 20 to 25 million. This 
means that we can look in reality to an increase in the numbers in the House 
of Representatives.

            At the present moment, five Senators come up for election every
three years.   This means one Party has a possibility of getting a majority, 
but if six Senators were elected every three years, it is highly likely that 
we would have a permanently deadlocked Senate with three from each side. This 
would make Government extraordinarily difficult.

            That means that if you are going to increase the Senate you would 
have to go from five to seven being elected every three years. Then one 
side would have the opportunity of getting four out of the seven. If seven 
Senators were being elected from each State every three years, we would have a 
Senate of 84, and if we had a Senate of 84 - while the present connection with 
the House of Representatives remains in the Constitution - the House of 
Representatives would be 168. I, for one, would say that an increase of this 
size in the House of Representatives would be unwarranted at the present point 
of time, and I don't believe, in reality, that any increase is required in the 
Senate.

            Thus, if this particular part of the Constitution is put to break 
the nexus between the House of Representatives and the Senate, it would become 
possible to increase the House of Representatives by 8 for 10 or 12 Or 14 and 
such increases would be reasonable . The situation in the Senate would not be 
affected.


                                                                   /2

                2

       The Bill that is being introduced into the Parliament on this 
matter also provides that each member would represent not less than 50,000 
people. This would still be significantly more than the number represented in 
1949 which stood at 66,000. In addition, the States' rights are protected by 
also suggesting that the Constitution should be amended so that the original 
States are entitled to no fewer than six Senators. This would prevent any 
reduction in the Senate from the present number.

       In short, the purpose of this Constitutional amendment is to 
enable the House of Representatives to grow as Australia grows and as the 
duties devolving upon individual members of Parliament become pore complex and 
more commanding of time and effort. It is designed so that the House of 
Representatives can be increased by a moderate number and not by an extravagant 
number, which would be the case if the Senate were forced to be expanded every 
time there was a wish to increase the numbers of the House of Representatives.

       The Prime Minister also introduced a second Bill whose purpose 
was to alter the Constitution by repealing Section 127. This Section provides 
that, in determining the numbers of people in the Commonwealth or in a State 
or in Commonwealth Territories, aboriginal natives would not be counted. Such 
a Section is out of keeping with the sentiments of the average Australian 
and is certainly out of keeping with the times in which we live. Commonwealth 
policy is directed to see that aboriginal natives are given every opportunity, 
encouraement and help to take their proper place in Australian society: Only 
recently, the Commonwealth gave evidence before the Arbitration Court hearing 
the case for the Pastoral Award in the Northern Territory. For a long time, 
aboriginal stockmen had been paid much less than white stockmen. The Govern- 
ment has given evidence suggesting that aboriginal stockmen's wages should be 
brought up to a level equal to that of white stockmen over a period of a few 
years. This is just one example of Government moves to establish full and 
proper equality.

       There is no excuse for leaving this Section in the 
Constitution. and I certainly hope that the referendum to remove it will be 
fully supported by the Australian people.






             --------000

