<!--start metadata-->
Title: India
Description: press statement
Date: 2/12/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:

                         December 2nd, 1962


                INDIA


     For the last several weeks India and China have been at war. The 
fighting on the northern frontiers of India, high in the Himalayas, has gone 
beyond the normal border skirmish which has been common for several years. 
India has announced its determination to fight until the Chinese are driven 
from Indian soil.

     The United States and the United Kingdom have promised to supply 
India with arms.

     The Indo-Chinese war may have greater long-term repercussions on 
the alignments between the Eaat and the West than will ie recent Cuban crisis. 
Since India's Independence, her Leader, Mr. Nehru, has pursued a policy of non- 
alignment. He has refused to have military alliances with the East or the 
West. On many issues he has taken an attitude that we believe has favoured 
the Communist powers more than it should have, but India is an independent 
country and has the right to make up her own mind. If we have not always 
agreed with her views, her views have always been respected by the West.

     It is, perhaps, natural that India would take a view to some degree 
different to that taken by the United Kingdom over international problems 
because the memory of being ruled by the British is still very much alive in 
India, and it would be natural that India would want to emphasise her 
independence from Britain by taking views on major questions that were different 
from Britain's.

     This policy of non-alignment has meant that India has no alliance 
with other countries and that no other country is bound by treaty to come to 
India's aid at the present time. It has also meant that India's armed forces 
are probably less well armed than they might otherwise have been because India 
is not a rich country when you consider her large population and her major 
efforts have been directed towards developmental projects designed to raise 
her standard of life. This has meant that, in this conflict her forces are at 
a disadvantage as compared with the Chinese forces because, where India has 
been building and preparing for peaceful development, there is no doubt that a 
very large part of Communist China's development has gone to increasing her 
military strength. However, decisions made recently to supply arms to India 
may well redress the balance to some extent.

     It will be almost impossible for India to remain as aloof and as 
non-aligned as she has been in the past. Indeed, it wa: somewhat tragic to 
see the statement by her Prime Minister Nehru in which he said that India had 
been living, to some extent, in a world of Eller own, divorced from the realities 
of world politics. This could indicate a far-reaching and long-term re- 
appraisal of India's policies. But the conflict may go much further than the 
boundaries of India because there is no doubt that India's policies have had 
a very marked influence on the policies of other neutral independent nations. 
This Indo-Chinese war, therefore, may herald changes in world politics which 
will have far-reaching consequences.

     There are some people who have asked why has China started this war, 
especially since China has gone out of her way to settle border disputes with 
other countries in the Himalayan area without fighting. The answer seems to 
be that the Chinese wish to isolate and humiliate India to show the countries 
of Asia and the world that the Chinese way is a stronger way than India's, 
and that India does not really deserve the leadership of the uncommitted


                                /2.

                                     2 -




 nations that she has had - does not deserve it because     is incapable of
 defending her own territories. The Chinese might argue that the uncommitted 
 countries would then look around and perhaps decide that since China is the 
 stronger country they should adopt policies that would be more pleasing to 
 Peking.

            On the other hand, the so-called neutralist countries around the 
 world might well become disillusioned as a result of Communist China's 
 aggression and could take a somewhat different view of the 'Fast--" est struggle
 than they have up to the present time    If this did occur, it could well be 
 reflected in their voting in the United Nations and in their actions in other 
 world forums.

            This does not seem to me to be a very realistic appraisal of why the 
 Chinese have forced this war, but it is the only solution that has been offered. 
 It assumes, for a start, a Chinese victory in which the Chinese may have 
 implicit faith but in which nobody else will for the simple reason that other 
 free countries of the world have said they will give all the assistance that 
 is needed _to India to defend her own borders.

           Both the Cuban dspute and the Indo-CMliese war have emphasised 
 differences between Moscow and Peking_ After Chairman Krushchev had announced 
 that the missile bases would be withdrawn from Cuba, the Chinese leading 
 newspaper carried editorials which said that the missile bases should be left 
 in Cuba, thus ignoring the Russian decision.. The Russians themselves have
 been notably cool towards the Chinese over the Indo-Chinese war.   It is true 
 that Moscow has not openly rebuked Peking for this conflict, but the Russians 
 have not supported the Chinese as openly and as wholeheartedly as they could 
 have.

           At the present time, India still says that she can maintain her 
 policy of non-alignment between East and West despite hér war with Communist 
 China. It is difficult to see how she can persist in this attitude. She is 
 at war with a Communist country. She is getting additional supplies of arms 
 from Britain and from the United States - arms which will be necessary for her 
 conflict with China. Our own Minister for External Affairs is in India at
 the present time to discuss wflat possible aid we may be able to give. It 
would be impossible for a country that has suffered from direct and overt 
 Communist aggression.to remain entirely aloof in the East-West struggle. This
 is what India has done in the past.    In the future, her votes in the United 
 Nations and her decisions and views on world issues may well conform more to 
 the Wests than to the Communists,

           I would not expect to see this policy change quickly. These 
matters will take some time to work out but I will be surprised indeed if 
 the changes do not occur.

