<!--start metadata-->
Title: Quarantine - cholera and foot and mouth
Description: press statement
Date: 4/11/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRT,â:,ì ,JTATEIENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                      November 4th,1962


                 QUARANTINE - CHOTFRA AND FOOT & MOUTH

                 In this last week matters have been raised in the Parliament 
which should be of real concern to every Australian and particularly to those 
in the farming and pastoral industries. One of the more important involves 
the cholera outbreak in West New Guinea.

                 As T understand it, this is the first time cholera has been 
discovered in West New Guinea or, for that matter, in any part of New Guinea. 
While the Dutch remained in West New Guinea we could be reasonably certain 
that strict and adequate quarantine measures would be imposed. This was, 
of course, vital not only for the people and animals in West New Guinea but
also for the Australian part of New Guinea. It would not be possible, if 
quarantine measures failed on the coast, to•establish adequate quarantine 
measures on the land border between East and West New Guinea. This is partly 
because the border is not well defined; partly because it goes through some 
very rough country, and partly because some diseases that could come into 
West New Guinea are spread by means that would in no way respect land boundaries.

                 We have not yet been able to find out how the cholera outbreak 
began in West New Guinea. It is possible that cholera can be introduced by
contaminated meat or by contaminated water. I have bey told that it is not 
spread by personal contact by one person with another. The source of the 
outbreak was about 200 miles east of Hollandia and none of the United Nations 
or Indonesian personnel would have been to the villsge in which it occurred. 
This leads one to suppose that one of the paratroopers that were dropped into 
West New Guinea by the Indonesians may have introduced cholera. This,
however, is just supposition and the actual reasons for the outbreak may never 
be known.

                The United Nations was on the scene quickly and has isolated 
the area and most rigid controls are being imposed which will probably prevent 
cholera spreading.

                From Australia's point of view, adequate quarantine measures 
to safeguard the health of livestock in New Guinea may be more important than 
quarantine to safeguard the people. This is because the diseases which could 
attack people are more easily controlled than are spme of the diseases which 
could attack the animal population. The most important of these would be
foot and mouth and footrot cattle disease.  If foot and mouth was ever 
introduced to Australia, for example, the cost to this country could run into 
millions of £'s. annually and it could rob us of important markets in overseas 
countries.

                Foot and mouth is quite common in some of the Indonesian 
islands but not in all. It is common in Europe and occasionally there are 
outbreaks in the United Kingdom. However, because of the settled nature of 
the United Kingdom countryside, it has always been possible to isolate, 
control and eradicate foot and mouth when it has got into the United Kingdom,

                You may ask why, if they can eradicate foot and mouth, does 
it continually recur from time to time. This is because of the means by 
which foot and mouth is spread. The chief means of spreading foot and 
mouth from the European continent to the United Kingdom has been by migrating 
birds. If an outbreak occurs in a part of Europe and if birds are present 
in the same district, just before they are due to migrate to Britain, they 
very often take the disease with them. Birds can carry foot and mouth by 
playing around in paddocks in which the cattle have been present or from 
perching on the backs of cattle which birds sometimes do.

                It is obviously quite impossible to prevent this sort of 
thing. However, the cost of control and the cost of eradicating foot and

                                                                 /2.

                                   2 -


mouth in Britain every time an outbreak occurs is very heavy indeed.

                Let us look at this position in relation to New Guinea. 
So far, foot and mouth disease has been kept out of West New Guinea. 
However, it is possible it could be introduced by contaminated meat or by
the introduction of animals which are carrying the disease.   If this occurs, 
it would be almost impossible, if not quite impossible, to prevent foot and
mouth spreading from West to East New Guinea.   It could so easily be carried 
by travelling birds as it is carried from Europe to the United Kingdom.

                If foot and mouth did become present in New Guinea it would 
almost certainly appear in Northern Queensland and once in Northern Queens- 
land it could spread to different parts of Australia.

                One of the difficulties of our position would be that 
control and eradication measures would be very nearly impossible under the 
grazing conditions which are usual in Queensland, the Northern Territory or 
the Kimberleys. I understand that eradication measures involve the 
slaughter of all animals that have been in contact and the isolation for a 
certain period of all animals in the particular area. This would not be 
possible in Northern Australia where there are few fences and where cattle 
can retreat into inaccessible and very rough country.

                There is another aspect of this matter which is most
important. There are many markets in the world that wf..11 only accept
meat from foot and mouth free areas. This is because there is   a possibility 
that foot and mouth can be spread by the carcases of chilled or frozen meat.
There are some who say that it can be spread by canned meat.

                The United States has banned all imports of chilled and 
frozen meat from the Argentine which used to be her largest supplier on 
the grounds that foot and mouth which is in the Argentine could apread 
to the United States. This is one of the reasons why our own meat sales 
to the United States have risen from a negligible amount five, six or 
seven years ago to about 46 million pounds worth last year. The United 
States Market could become closed to Australia if foot and mouth was ever 
introduced to this country.

                These matters don't need any emphasis to underline their 
importance. Australia is vitally concerned in this problem and his fact 
is evident to every farmer and agriculturist in Australia.

                The Government has been in touch with the United Nations 
organization-at present administering West New Guinea and also with the 
Indonesians about the problems involved in the maintenance of adequate 
quarantine restrictions on the coast of West New Guinea. If Australia was 
asked to help in the maintenance of such control measures I am quite sure 
the Government would see that we supplied ^.r_T help :'cr which we were asked. 
Meanwhile, the whole matter will be watched :.lose y,




                                  o000o

