<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters, economy
Description: radio talk
Date: 6/10/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              There has never been a gerrymander or an attempt to

engineer a gerrymander, in the history of Commonwealth elections. 
This has been stated from time to time by politicians from all 

sides, and I believe anyone who makes such a charge really has his 

tongue in his cheek or does not know the real meaning of the word.
T$~-@?~-~1—~}i-E#i.ana~;~~~TPC the--mean-ing~~s^to°*mariipülâte`so.
as to g ve undue--in-f-l-uence--ta—soirre—class ë c .'                                                                                                                            u,t1erhaps the

origin of the word itself is iTtoe interesting in the context of a                                   l"
discussion on electorates. Experts say that it came from the name 

of the governor of an American state called Gerry who signed into 

law the boundaries of a district which were manipulated for 
political gain. The shape of the district was like a salamander... 

so, the word'gerrymander' was born.
              Both Houses of the Federal parliament during the week have 

debated the proposals introduced by the Government for redist- 

ribution of the present 122 electorates in the states.
              The current proposals provide for an increase in the number 

of Victorian electorates by one to 34, decreasing New South Wales 
electorates by one to 45, and increasing South Australia's seatsby 
one to 12. They leave the numbers of seats in Western Australia, 

Queensland and Tasmania intact, so that there is an overall
increase to 123 in the number of seats in the states.
              How did this come about? It is the function of the Commonwealth 

electoral office to determine the number of members of the House 

of Representatives for the States after each population census 

is taken. These are now taken every five years. A re-distribution 

of electorates is made because of the increase or decrease of a 
State's population and of population movements within a state. 

A formula determines the number of representatives each state 

is to have in the new House. rFir t', the total opulatinri the
States is divided by 120 twice the number                                                                                                                                                          'r. of Senator-s This 

produces a quota whl'ch is then divided into the population of, 
     ítate       and he                                           It i h number                                                            members for that state. 
Tom ïnd the number of electors rn each division,, the number of

members ' divided into tie total number                                                                                                                         -electors in the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .../2

                            -2—

  state: ,}F°-ri-s-4re<as Victoria is entitled to 34 Federal
  members and the number of voters for each electorate is to be
  around 51,675.
      There have been charges that the present proposals flew in
  the face of equal representation for the people because of the
  provision in the Electoral Act allowing the number of electors in
  a division to be up to one-fifth higher or lower than the quota.
  It was the provision for a lower number in country electorates
  that drew fire from some sections of the Opposition in the
  House debate. But this argument places no value on two points
  oney that the provision has been in the Eleëtoral Act since
  Federation, and two, fails to take account of great size of many
  country electorates and the tremendous hardships this imposes
  in adequately representing it. The very size is a disadvantage
  to the member and the residents of these electorates, so that
  arguments of 'one vote, one value' have a rather theoretical ring
  when one takes account of this. Take Kalgoorlie, for instance,
  an electorate 1500 miles long, 1000 miles wide and covering nearly
  900,000 square miles. Or Kennedy, in Queensland, occupying
  283,600 square miles out of Queensland's total area of 670,500
  square miles.
     Redistributions of Federal electorates have taken place ik-.ti~~
._1     1_906-, 19.12r_L9.22-, 1$37,-°°194$ â;rid—I9 ^ There has not been
  one since 1955, as the proposals brought forward in 1961 — which 
 were determined on the  old formula and would have i rx i a loss of 
  one seat each in three states — were ultimately dropped. In the 
 period since 1955 population movements and increase have  caused
  enormous disparities in the populations of electorates. For instance, 
  in Victoria the electorate of Bruce has 130,000 compared with 
 Melbourne where numbers have shrunk to 30,000. In New South Wales 
 the seat of Mitchell has grown to nearly 110,000 — while West 
 Sydney's electors number only 29,000. This unequal representation 
 will be overcome by the current proposals put forward by the 
 Commissioners in each of the states and accepted by the Government.
     Great heat tends to be generated by a re—distribution. This

                       -3-





  is understandable because in any re-distribution there are always 

  members who are unhappy with proposed alterations of their electorate 

  boundaries. They either lose supporters, or perhaps gain unwanted 

  electors from a hostile area- or suffer the blow of having their 

  electorate eliminated altogether. In the resultant emotional 

  atmosphere, tempers become frayed and charges and allegations

  can be hurled without any basis of fact. In the current situation
                                 c/r1.
  the Opposition perhaps believes therejiprospects for political gain

  in the tactics they have adopted. But it is interesting to hear 

  the Opposition Leader, Mr Whitlam, in the House stating that 

  the Parliament has had to wait seven years for a re-distribution 

  and that, and I quote from Hansard, 'clearly the present proposals 

  are acceptable to the extent that they are immeasurably more equal 

  than the existing distribution.' He added, 'If the choice is 

  between this proposed distribution and the present boundaries, there 

  can be no doubt that the proposals are to be preferred.' He also 

  stated that his criticisms of the proposals before the House 

  did not contain the allegation of a gerrymander.

     Speaking later in the debate the Prime Ministe, Mr Gorton 

  referred to arguments by Mr Whitlam in suppopvbf the contention 

  that country,electorates.should not have,.a smaller number of= 

  voters than city seats. The Prime Mi ster spoke of,a'submission 

  by-Mr Whitlam-to the re-distribution commissioners in New South 

  Walesysâsking that 4,000 voters should be taken out of the electorate 

  of!Prospect and added to Reid, making Reid the largest electorate 

  in New South Wales. Under the original proposals, the difference

  between Darling and-Grayndlerto which Mr Whitlam had referred, 

  was 4Ó.16__13ut under the proposals made by the Leader of the
 ,Opposition, the difference-between Darling and Reid would-hive 

  been 43.6%, said-the Prime Minister, neatly demolishing the case 

~                          ~— f'" -...k L
     At this point it help      i-seuss the way in which the 

  commissioners go about altering electorate boundaries. Appointment

                                                   ...14

~


               -4-

   of the commissioners themselves is an interesting point.
   Three are appointed for each State by the Governor-General.
   One of the Commissioners is to be the Chief Electoral Officer or
   an officer having similar qualifications, one is to be the Surveyor-
   General for the State or an officer with similar qualifications.
   The third is to be selected by the government usually from a
   panel of names put forward by the Chief Electoral Officer.
     When the commissioners sit down to determine where the new
   boundaries should be they take into account a series of factors
   laid down by law. They must consider community of interest with
   a division, including economic, social and regional interests.
   They must consider means of communication and travel with4the
   division, with special reference to disabilities arising out
   of remoteness or distance. They must look at the trend of
   population changes within the state, the density or sparsity
   of a division's population, its area, the physical features, as
   well as existing boundaries of divisions and subdivisions. And
   before a distribution is made anyone may lodge suggestions with the
   commissioners, and after the commissioners have finished their
   tasks, their proposals are exhibited publicly for 30 days to
   allow objections or suggestions to be lodged.
     Victorian Premier, Sir Henry Bolte, and his government won
   deserved praise from farmers' organisations for the decision to
   abolish land tax imposed on farmlands. This is a decision of great
   importance to rural producers, as it will have the effect of
   decreasing pressure on production costs. It is most welcome news
   also to those farmers emerging from the effects of crippling
   drought. The Commonwealth, it might be recalled, abolished
   its land taxes in 1951. It is interesting to note that the last
   annual Commonwealth collections of this tax totalled about $13
   million. Land taxes imposed by the States over all categories
   of land in the financial year 1966/67 totalled more than
   $72 million.
     There was good news also for primary producers in New South
   Wales in the Budget brought down during the week by Premier
   Askin.
                              /5

                                                          -5—



          The Government is to eliminate land tax on land used 

for primary production over the next three years, because of 

the problems facing producers through rising costs and the 

longer — term effects of the drought.
   --'ecently the Commissioner of Trade Practices, Mr R.M. Bannerman 

produced his first annual report, which was tabled in Parliament.
Part of the report was a reminder of the functions of the 

Commissioner — to keep a register of trade agreements, to contain 

examinable agreements; to consider whether agreements and practices 

are examinable under the Act and are contrary to the public 

interest; to institute proceedings in the Trade Practices 
Tribunal; to consult beforehand with parties to agreements or 

practices with a view to rendering proceedings unnecessary. The 
Act, the main part of which became law in December, 1965, is 

entitled 'an act to preserve competition in Australian trade
and commerce to the extent required by the public interest.'              1
By June 30 this year parties to' agreements had lodged a total 

of 10,841 registrations with the Register of Trade Agreements. 
The largest number — 4622 — cam from Melbourne, there were

3,659 from Sydney, 825 from Brisbane and lesser numbers from                i
the other capitals. Mr Bannerman reported that industry had widely

accepted the view that lodging agreements for registration was 
the prudent course in cases of doubt and that registration did
not affect the public interest question.                                      C                           Examinability, he
said, was ultimately a matter fob the Tribunal itself and not a

matter for the Commissioner to determine at the point of registration.        1
          The registration figures, heIsaid, did not provide a direct 

measure of the degree or effecti eness of restriction on competition.

Distribution agreements between almanufacturer or wholesaler and                                                             o
his outlets would not usually be egistrable in the U.K. whereas

in Australia over half of the Register consists of such agreements. 
The usual basis of the lodgement Ilas that the manufacturer or 

wholesaler sometimes competed with his own outlets so that the 

distribution agreement became an açreement between competitors,, 

Mr Bannerman reported that examina ion of agreements in the 
Office commenced as soon as documents began to be lodged for

registration. Ten major cases were\being studied at present -
                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                     .../6

•


                 —6—

     cases concerned with the manufacture and marketing of both producer 
     and consumer goods and include commodities commonly purchased by 
     public authorities. The studies cover nearly 100 horizontal 
     agreements and four times as many related distribution
     agreements, he said.

