<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Description: Reports on proceedings in Canberra - radio talk 
Date: 14/10/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                     MALCOLM                   FRASEL 1f $é } FOR W L NON                                                                                                    x~~
                                                           PR 1C 1â;: I oiN CE fl G AA;3 : RA - 2nd-4th OCTO

                                                COMMONWEALTH SCI T IC lob INDUSTRIAL IpSEARC t ORGAOTSATION.
                                             Last week during the intimates debate I spoke on the 

     Comnonwealbh Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. I think
   most people on the land realise the great value to primary producers of
     the work that this Organisation carries out.                                                                                                                   V';e have only to think 
     of the development of the Mules operation and the adaptation of aldrin 
   and dieldrin to ustra1ian conditions which have made the problem of the
   blowfly a relatively minor one.                                                                                       There is than the work of trace 
   elements that has brought hundreds of thousands of acres of formerly
   barren land into production.                                                                               Many people from my electorate have seen 
   what has been done by the Australian kutual Provident Siety at Keith 
   and again fat lamb production at the Adelaide Hills is almost entirely 
   dependent upon the use of trace elements combined with superphosphates.

                                           Only in the last year or two we have seen the development 
   of a branding fluid that will bast on the sheep for identification 

  purposes but which will scour out without any risk from particles of the 
  fluid remaining in the fleece and damaging fabrics as it is woven.
                                           The work that the Orgenisation does for industry is probably
                       s important but it is less spect'iacular and less widely known. 
  However, one thing is qui to clear, the combined effect of past achieve- 

  ments wttibh aid both the ind uetria].ist and the man on the land save 
  millions of pounds annually.

                                         I believe it is false economy in these days of financial 
  stringency to keep the C.S.I.R.O. short of funds. With greater develop- 
ment on the land, with higher productivity and with more intense use of 
  available resources new problems are constantly rising which demand the 
attention of our scientists. without their aid continued intensive 
development will became increasingly more difficult.

                                         I would like to give two examples of the work that is waiting 
to be done which has hamd1y been touched by the Organisation because of 

the shortage of funds. Firstly, there is the problem of weeds. We 
know far too little about htw they spread and how to control them. The 
second problem is the question of pasture plant breeding. At present 

our main greases have been adapted frog other countries. They have not

been grown specifically for our own conditions. If clover and grasses

                           ~     00
can be bred to suit particular areas of Australia, then weepy be 
able to extend our short growing period further into the surmer. 
We may be able to breed grasses that will grow better in the cold 
wet winter meet e. If we can do this, the development of pasture 
plant breodin€, b y increasing productivity of fertile areas -_,°may well 
be as important in the future as the development: of trace areas has 
been in the past. It is Go be hoped in the future that money will be 
made available to enable the 0rgani tion to extend its work in these 
fields,
              also h € that finance wi11 be found for doing soma 
specific work in the Western District. I believe there are two 
problems in our own pert of tbe world which are not necessarily 
peculiar to the Western District but which are probably mere important 
to it than to any other.
            The first is the problem of pasture deterioration. rho 
problem of native or volunteer grimes comity back and replacing
clover, rye or phalaris.   As this hsppe4s productivity falls and
we are not quit eçure why this, happens, This presents a very wide 
problem. It may be a matter of pasture manag eat but at the present
we cannot say do   tically.
            The second problem is in relation to lamb and weener 
losses. In both these fields there is scope for work by the Common- 
wealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in conjunction 
with the Department of griculture.
            If present financial conditions do not make it possible 
to buy a Research Station to carry out trials for both these problems, 
then it may well be possible to lease a property where experiments 
can be conducted with a view to helping pastoralists solve their 
troubles. If this can be done, the return to the country will be 
great.

