<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth technical training week
Description: press statement
Date: 4/06/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               PRESS STATEMENT
                                                            June 4th,1961
                           COMMONWEALTH TECHNICAL TRAINING WEEK
                  The Commonwealth technical training week has been held in
               Victoria from May 29th to June 4th. This coincides with the Week 
               in the United Kingdom and many other participating countries 
               throughout the Commonwealth.
                   Technical training is becoming ever more important in our modern 
               society and, as I understand it, the purpose of this Week was to 
               emphasise this importance and, at the same time, to give interested 
               people an idea of what a good technical training can achieve.
                   There are two main aims of technical schools at the present 
               time. The first and really important aim is to continue the 
               general education at secondary level of boys from sixth grade and
               higher standards.  Secondly, the purpose of the Technical School
               is to give boys training in the applied sciences, arts, trades
               and agriculture.
                    In addition, Technical schools by means of their training help
               boys to find out what type of career they wish to enter; whether
•              it be professional, technical or some form of industrial or
               primary production.
                    The courses at the Technical schools qualify students to
               continue with Senior Technical certificate or Diploma Courses or,
               alternatively, they qualify students to enter the University to
               complete a Degree course.
                    There was a time when many people looked down on technical
               training and technical schools, feeling this was a second class
               king of education for those not able to master the more traditional
               subjects. The quality and scope and the purpose of Technical
               schools at the present time is such that if this was ever true it
               certainly is not true now. A good technical training and education
               is equal to any and for many pupils might well be better suited
•              than the traditional education.
                     You might like to have some idea of the actual subjects that
               are studied in Junior Forms of Technical schools.
                     Nearly half of the time is still taken up with the Humanities -
               English, Social Studies, Music , Arts and Crafts; about a quarter
               of the time is devoted to Mathematics and Science and about one
               fifth to practical subjects such as Instrument Drawing, Woodwork
               and Metalwork.  The remainder of the time is given over to 
               Sports and Physical Education.
                     There is a very wide spread of careers open to children who 
               have been thrœ gh the technical school in the professional field. 
               They can go on to become Architects, Engineers, Applied Scientists, 
               Chemists, Technologists and Technicians of different kinds. In 
               Commerce they can enter Accountancy, Banking or the Clerical field. 
               In trades there are many fields open - Mechanics, Boilermakers, 
               Bricklayers, Cabinetmakers, Electrical mechanics, Silversmiths, 
               Television mechanics, Watchmakers or uaelders.
                     In all the fields I have mentioned only a sample of the 
               jobs that are open to people whO have had a technical education.

                                       -    2


                          So far as Hamilton & District is concerned local people 
                quite clearly would not be so concerned with technical education 
                in the general sense as they would be with their own technical

                school at Hamilton.    This school was established as a purely 
                independent Technical School at the beginning of this year. The 

                school has a full-time enrolment of 290 junior students, it has 
                eight senior students and a part-time enrolment of 75 'apprentices 
                and about 90 evening students.

                          The Junior School covers a complete four year course. 
                Boys can enter the Junior School at the age of about 11 or 12 years 
                and leave at the age of about 15 or 16 years. At the end of the 
                third year boys can get their Junior Technical Certificates, and 

                this Certificate qualifies boys for apprenticeship to many trades.

                          However, if a lad goes on to get his Intermediate 
                Technical Certificate this will give him a much better start for 
                the trades than with a Junior Technical Certificate.
                          Training the students to enter apprenticeship trades is
                by no means the whole work of the Technical School.      There are farm 
~               courses for the boys who wish to become farmers. These courses 
                are carefully planned in the light of modern conditions and their 

                purpose is to give boys an interest in efficient scientific
               methods of farming.     This starts in the third year and continues 
                through into the Senior School.

                          The gifted scholar can also enter a professional course 
               through the Technical School, and this is one of the most important
               aspects of these schools.     At the Hamilton Technical School five 
               students are doing the first year of the four year Engineering 
               Diploma course and three students have started a senior course

               in Agriculture.    Eventually, it is hoped that the full Diploma 
               Course in Engineering will be completed at the Hamilton Technical 

•              College and this would qualify students to go through into the 
               3rd year of a Degree Course at the University.

                          It is clear that this new Hamilton Technical School has 
               made a very fine start, and it is expected that its students will

               become leaders throughout the Community.      As a result of their 
               participation in the school they will be able to find a better and 
               more prosperous place in the community for themselves and their 
               families.

                          I hope many people saw the samples of work being done 
               at the Hamilton Technical College, which were exhibited on Monday,
               May 29th and Tuesday, May 30th, in the Town Hall.      In addition, 
               there was an Apprenticeship Award Night when Mr. Graeme Greenburger, 
               an Overseas Foundation Scholarship v+inner, was the Guest Speaker.

                           These exhibitions and the Award Night should have 
               given an insight into the work that the school can do, and into 
               the manner into which it can train its students for their future 
               life.

                          The school is undoubtedly a great asset to Hamilton 
               I wish its Headmaster and Staff and all the Students who are

                   3
        passing through it all the best for the future.
            I would not like it thought I was unaware of the 
        fine work done by other Technical Schools, especially the 
        `arrnambool School, but I have devoted a large part of this 
        talk to the Hamilton School because this is the first year of 
        the Technical School's independence from the High School.











•











•

