<!--start metadata-->
Title: Illegal importation of cattle semen
Description: press statement
Date: 7/12/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEÔ ENT :

I ÌALCOLM FRASER :

                                       December 7th,1965


          The following is a statement made by the Minister for Health, 
 the Hon. R. W. Swartz, on the illegal importation of semen.

         "Early in September a Mr. Gordon Burcher returned from America 
bringing with him a vacuum flask containing 58 ampoules of cattle semen.

          On arrival at Sydney airport he declared the vacuum flask 
to Customs Officers but not its contents.

          He took this semen to his farm at Mount Crosby, about 25 
miles south west of Brisbane and over the last three weeks he has in- 
seminated four cows with it.

          On 25th November he took three ampoules to the Veterinary 
School at Queensland University where he asked a technician to tell him 
if the semen was still viable. On November 26th the Chief Quarantine 
Officer (Animals) at Brisbane was informed of this.

          He immediately confiscated all unused ampoules and quarantined 
the farm. After consultation with my Department, he ordered destruction of 
all ruminents on Burchers farm viz., 21 cows and 13 calves.

         The semen was obtained from a Government Artificial Insemination 
Centre in British Columbia, Canada, which borders the United States of
America. As bluetongue is widespread in the United States of America 
there is a possibility that the virus may have crossed into the neighbouring 
provinces of Canada.

         Bluetongue is a serious disease of sheep which is transmitted 
by midges of the genus Culicoides, hence it cannot be contained by isolation 
of infected animals. Cattle can be inapparent carriers of the virus and 
it is transmitted from them to sheep and other cattle by midges.

         There is no suspicion whatsoever that this semen contains foot 
and mouth disease virus as it is many years since foot and mouth disease has 
been present in North America.

         I must point out that the Animal Quarantine Service is responsible 
for keeping bluetongue and other diseases of animals out of Australia but 
in the event of the entry of a disease, it is the responsibility of the
State concerned to deal with it.

         On Tuesday last the Director of Veterinary Hygiene of my 
Department convened a Consultative Committee of senior veterinary officials 
in Brisbane which recommended the slaughter of all ruminants within 12 miles 
of Burcher's farm, the insecticide fogging of all habitats of midges in this 
area and sealing off of the area for ruminant animals for two months after 
slaughter operations have been completed. This will involve the slaughter 
at abattoirs of approximately 600 or more animals. Any form of compensation 
will be considered by the Queensland Government.

         The Queensland Government and particularly the Queensland Minister 
for Primary Industries is to be commended on his prompt acceptance of these 
recommendations by the Consultative Committee and there is every reason to 
hope that any possible outbreak of disease will be averted.

         This is a gegrettable incident which demonstrates how the action 
of an individual can frustrate the efforts of the best quarantine precautions.

         The question of any legal action against Mr. Gordon Butcher is 
under consideration by the Commonwealth Goverzunent.n

                                                 /2

                               2



           If the Minister's statement is read carefully it will be clear 
that it was purely chance that led to the discovery of this illegally
imported semen.  The vacuum flask had been passed through Customs without 
its contents being inspected, and the importation was only discovered when 
AIr. Murcher took three ampoules to the Veterinary School at the Queensland 
University to find out if the semen was still viable. The technician who 
thought the circumstances were suspicious certainly needs congratulating.

           It is important to note that Mr. Burcher returned from America 
early in September and it was not until November 25th that he went to the 
Veterinary School to have the semen tested ó at least two months after the 
importation.

           This incident demonstrates the difficulty in scrutinising 
people who come into this country in a manner that is both reasonable from 
a personal point of view and which is also adequate to meet the various
quarantine precautions. I think the incident will cause our Quarantine 
Officers to ask themselves if what is being done at the moment is all that 
can and should be done.



                          ------000-------_

