<!--start metadata-->
Title: Public Service Superannuation Bill
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 9/11/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 E(A c  i duc      flbr%

The Opposition parties have agreed on compromise 
amendments to the public service superannuation bill, 
which is now before the Senate.

The Opposition parties opposed this bill in its original 
form because we held that it would be too costly a
burden on the public revenue and more than the private sector 
could hope to match.

The Opposition parties supported the overall proposals 
which the government made but propo:led three amendments 
which were rejected by the government and which have been 
a pretext for the government not to proceed with this 
legislation.

A. number of contributors and some public service unions 
have made representations to the Opposition and as a 
result we have agreed with them on a just compromise.

The agreed compromise would enab]e public servants to 
retire five years earlier at the age of 60, on 90% of 
the full pension.

It would provide for an additional pension after more than 
thirty years of service at the rate of one-quarter percent 
perannum, and at the request of the public service unions 
it would remove the option of members of the public service 
to remain contributors in the existing superannuation scheme.

                                                         -2-

The public service unions agreed to accept the Opposition 
amendment that there should be no consumer price index 
adjustments to that part of the pension which is purchased 
by members' contributions.

The compromises i4u.tisomligammile have been agreed on because 
of the hardship for a large number of public servants 
which is brought on by the government's failure to go 
ahead with this Bill, except as completely unamended.

The Opposition parties have lso taken steps to guarantee 
the integrity of th publ service and to improve its 
machinery and its ffici ncy.

Because of public disiet about the motives behind some 
of the government's felppointments of permanent heads of ft
public service dep4rtments, the Opposition has drawn up 
principles which ould guidethe next Liberal-National 
Country Party gofernment.

               3







    People are entitled to be concerned whether well-established 
    principles of appointment on merit are being jeopardised 
    by the present govrnment. This concern is felt within the 
    public service as well as more broadly within the community.

    The Opposition parties consider that there should be procedures 
•   to ensure that the persons appointed as permanent heads of 
    government departments are the best available. The procedures 
    should be such as to ensure that suitable candidates for these 
    positions from within the public servic3 should not be passed 
    over while enabling appointments also to be made from outside 
    the service.

    The Opposition proposes that the public service board should either 
    put forward a short-list of suitable candidates from the public 
    service for a vacant position at the head of a department, or 
    advise whether the post should be advertised.

    If the position is advertised then the board should set up a 
    high level selection committee which would include suitable 
    persons from outside the service. In cases of appointments, 
    of persons as permanent heads whose names have not been submitted 
    by the public service board or produced by an advertisement, 
    the Opposition would feel free to review the case without 
    preserving normal rights of permanent heads.

                      4


The public service act will be amended by the next 
Liberal-National Country Party government to establish these 
procedures.

The Opposition parties believe that permanent heads should 
be moved as part of a positive personnel policy to open up 
new challenges for them.

The Parties also hold that the abolition or amalgamation of 
departments should not compromise the rights of their permanent 
heads.

It is obviously justifiable to reassign or retire a permanent 
head for medical reasons or because he has become exhausted
in the job. And the adequacy of compensation, will be examined. 
In other cases, the rights of permanent heads should be 
preserved.

The next coalition government would set up a standing
committee of cabinet to deal with organisational and administrative 
natters, including the appointment of permanent heads. It would 
also expect the public service board to bring down an executive 
development programme and a system of succession planning.

Under this promotion to or in the second division,
would require some qualifications of permanent head's powers.

The aim of these Opposition reforms is to guarantee the integrity 
of the public service and to improve its machinery and its 
 efficiency.

