<!--start metadata-->
Title: South Africa's withdrawal
Description: press statement
Date: 23/04/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT    `'LEEK LADING .URD APRIL.j 96i.


           SOUTH AFRICA'S WITHDRAWAL.

      Three or four weeks ago I gave my own views on South 
Africa's withdrawal from the Coi,unonwealth. Since then, the 
Opposition has attacked the Prime Minister for the stand which he 
has taken. The Opposition principally attacked our Prime Minister 
for refusing to condemn apartheid in terms that would reflect the 
views of the Australian people.

      The Prime Minister had maintained a strict silence 
on South Africa, believing that if all Prime Ministers in the 
Commonwealth refrained from committing themselves in public on this 
issue they would have a much greater chance of exerting an influence 
on South Africa at the Prime Ministers' Conference.

      This hope of our Prime Minister's was not to be, because 
he was the only one who was uncommitted on this issue before the 
Conference began, As a consequence of this, I believe the several 
Prime Ministers' influence on South Africa was as nothing. If they 
had not been previously committed to condemnation of apartheid, they 
might have won some modification of South Africa's views. However, 
now that everything is done and South Africa has withdrawn, our 
Prime Minister felt freed from his own inhibitions in regard to 
this matter and attacked apartheid and condemned it in terms which 
reflected the opinion of every Australian.

      The Prime Minister was also attacked for having differed 
from the United Kingdom Prime Minister, Mr. McMillan. I pointed 
out in the debate that, in the four essentials, the two Prime 
Ministers were as one. They both originally wanted South Africa to 
stay in the Commonwealth. They both worked to see that she should. 
They both wanted the best thing for the subjugated people of South 
Africa. They both deplored and abhorred the policy of apartheid 
that was being put into effect. These were the important issues. 
On these matters, they agreed.

      The most important reason for trying to keep South 
Africa in the Commonwealth was the belief and the hope that member- 
ship of the Commonwealth ,.could exert a moderating influence on 
South Africa's policies and would offer the best chance of ultimate 
freedom and equality for the 9 million Bantu in that country.

      Against this argument for keeping South Africa in 
the Commonwealth there are two powerful arguments for pushing her 
out. The first of these is that South Africa's withdrawal makes 
the Commonwealth a stronger moral force, and secondly, that it will 
increase the strength and unity of the Commonwealth. Essentially, 
I believe this will happen.

      We should try to understand the issues that are
involved - the nature of apartheid and its effect on the future of 
the Commonwealth. The conditions of the age make the issue a 
unique one. The spirit and emotion of our times are represented 
in the emancipation and self-government of coloured people and 
anything that flies in the face of this cannot stand. This was 
recognised by the Australian vote in the United Nations condemning 
apartheid. Although apartheid is internal in its administration, 
it is clearly international in effect. The reasons for this are 
plain.

      The Bantu in South Africa are second-class citizens 
while in other Commonwealth countries like Nigeria they have blood 
brothers who are our equal in station and respect. This is 
intolerable for African or Asian members of the Commonwealth. The

              -2-

emotion engendered by this is something that cannot be disregarded. 
South Africa has made this feeling worse by refusing to accept 
diplomatic representatives from Asian or African members of the 
Commonwealth.

      The crucial -point is tbiis. The South African Government 
is trying to make a right out of a wrong. Apartheid is its declared 
course of action for the future. In this, South Africa is trying 
to march against the course of history. While we ourselves are not 
free of all the prejudices and sins of the past, we are trying to 
rid ourselves of them as are other Commonwealth countries but South 
Africa was not and is not.

      All this makes apartheid a unique issue. In Australia 
we have felt this issue very deeply because South Africa was a 
foundation member of the Commonwealth, ostensibly a member of the 
free world and a member of the British family with some share in 
the British heritage. we have felt the crime that she is committing 
much worse than some things done in other countries in which more 
people have been hurt, killed or wounded, because we believe that 
South Africa has let the Commonwealth down and has let the free world 
down. We expect the free nations, the British nations in particular, 
to set an example. South Africa has done the opposite.

      I believe it inevitable that South Africa, determined 
on its present course, had to withdraw from the Commonwealth, 
especially when you have regard to the nature of the Commonwealth, 
The Commonwealth was once a small group of 5 nations with close ties of 
allegiance, race, colour and heritage. But now, Commonwealth coun- 
tries are not all bound by loyalty to the Throne. They are not 
bound by colour or by heritage. They are not all tied to any power 
group. They have no mutual defensive arrangements,

      There is only one possible common denominator for 
Commonwealth countries at the present time. It is a state of
common ideals based on racial equality, If the Commonwealth cannot 
work and maintain that principle then the Commonwealth cannot work 
at all. This still does not mean that we are all perfect in pursuit 
of these ideals but it means that we are all trying to pursue them 
as well as we can,

      I regard the Commonwealth as a bridge between people 
of different races and colours and it is important that this bridge 
stands. South Africa's withdrawal has made it -possible for the 
bridge to stand. If she had remained in the Commonwealth it would 
have fallen.

      If recent events have aroused some uneasiness in us 
for the future, we should all realise that we must make the 
Commonwealth work. If it cannot work, then the world cannot work, 
and there is not much hope for us,

