<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 25/02/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT: 


 MAICOLM FRASER:


                                                       February 25th,1962



         When I worte my last talk, just after the election, I , like many 
 others, thought the Government had won with a reduced but still comfortable
majority.    Two or three days later we all discovered that the Government 
was fighting for its life, and that it could be beaten. It wasn't for two 
or three weeks after the election that the final decision became known - 
a majority of one for the Government after the appointment of the Speaker.


         It appeared there was a large section of the community which had 
previously supported the Government which did not support the Government 
on December 9th, and any sane leader would certainly cast around in his 
mind and seek the reason why, and do what he could to remedy the position. 
This is, in fact, what the Prime Minister has done. Talks have been held 
with, I think, probably every responsible section of the Australian community, 
such as the Chamber of Manufactures, the Chamber of Commerce, the Banks, the 
National Farmers' Union and other Primary Industry Organizations. The views 
of all these organizations have been sought. The Government has asked what 
they thought was wrong with the economy. As a result of these talks, and 
as a result of the Government's own discussions a short while ago, several 
new measures were announced.


        A special non-repayable grant of £10M. has been made available to 
the States, which is to be spent on works that would add to the employment.
An additional £72M. is being made available for housing. Somi-government 
and local Government borrowing has also been substantially increased.


        Personal income tax has been reduced by 5% over the full year 1961/62. 
This will reduce Commonwealth revenue from this source by £30M.


        Sales tax on motor cars has been reduced from 30% to 22w. In this 
respect it must be recognised that the motor industry, together with its 
subsidiary industries, is one of the greatest employers in Australia.


        In addition to this the maximum loan orn a War Service Home has been 
increased from £2,750 to £3,500, and steps are being taken to further 
increase other lending for housing.


        These are all short term measures designed to give immediate 
stimulus to the economy to lift employment to a level which Australians and
the Government would regard as satisfactory. It should be remembered that 
the sums involved are larger than one would think because they are designed 
to operate over the last four months of the financial year, and thereafter 
the Budget of next August will take over.


        There are other long term measures.  For many years primary
industries have been able to write off 1/5th of the capital cost of new 
plant and equipment in each year, thus over 5 years the cost of such
equipment would be completely written off. Secondary industries have 
always tried to get this same allowance, and now a measure very similar is
going to be granted to them. There is an important reason for this  The 
local Australian market is relatively small; Australian industry cannot 
get the advantage of large scale production to the same extent that industries 
in the United Kingdom and the United States can. For this reason it is 
necessary that everything possible be done to see that Australian industry 
has the most modern and efficient equipment to help it compete. This measure 
will assist greatly in this regard.


        I am very glad that for reasons which I have mentioned repeatedly 
import licensing as it was once known is not going to be re-introduced. 
However, the Tariff Board will be given power, under certain circumstances, 
to recommend import restrictions to protect a certain industry. Such a power, 
I hope, will be used with the utmost discrimination.



                                                                  /2

                                -  2 ~.


                The Commonwealth Development Bank is having its capital 
increased by a further £5M. This is in addition to the £5M. added to this 
Bank's capital last August. I was interested to see a short while ago that 
since its inception that Bank has loaned £55M.

                These measures are designed to restore national confidence 
so that Australia can go ahead, and with a rate of growth such as it has had 
in the last 10 years. Rightly or wrongly the Government's measures of 14 
months ago reduced confidence and made both industries and private people
hesitant and reluctant to spend and plan for the future. Even though this 
result of the 1960 economic measures was unfortunate it should be remembered 
that this measure had done much to strengthen our Balance of Payments, and to 
reduce inflation, to bring about a real degree of financial stability which is 
so essential if our exports industries are to compete.

                Now I want to say something about confidence. This is one 
of the intangible things which Governments have to try to judge. For example, 
when a Government plans a Budget or an economic measure of any kind it has 
got to try and judge how that measure is going to affect people. If it judges 
wrongly the offect will not come out as the Government planned. There is no 
doubt that the 1960 measures shook confidence. Businesses were not prepared 
to plan for the future, and private people were more inclined to save and less
inclined to spend.   Some of us might think this is a good thing, but if 
everyone saves and no one spends, the less things will be bought from the 
shops, and if you have the volume of sales falling there is less demand for 
goods from factories - the factories find their stocks are building up and 
thus they cannot employ as many people as they once could.

                Rightly or wrongly the Government measures caused a change of 
heart in. regard to these matters. One only has to look at the official 
figures in the Savings Banks and on Fixed Deposit with the Trading Banks to 
see how savings have 2hcreased throughout these last 18 months. People were 
saving rather than spending.

                The measures just announced are designed to give a spurt to 
confidence. They, themselves, will not do the whole job, a return to the 
spending pattern a little nearer that of 18 months ago will also do a very 
great deal to revive the economy. Industry, too, must play its part and 
plan for an expanding future.

                During the last election I said that if the employment figures 
did not improve as they were in the Spring, I was confident that the Government, 
if returned, would introduce whatever measures it thought necessary to lift 
employment to proper levels. This faith in the Government has been justified 
and measures that will revive the employment levels have been introduced.

                There is one point which the Government will have to watch 
most closely. The unpopular measures of November, 1960, were introduced to 
curb inflation, and to bring a balance into our overseas reserves. It was 
most essential that inflation be curbed so far as the primary industries - 
the export industries - were concerned. Inflation must not be allowed to 
recur, if it does the position of the exporting industries will become untenable. 
The Government has the difficult task of balancing the economy in such a way 
that the employment levels are satisfactory which, at the moment, they are 
not, and, at the same time, preventing inflation which would jeopardise the 
future development of this country. If inflation does recur other means 
must be found to assist primary industries. It is essential that primary 
industries be maintained in an effective, efficient, economic and productive 
manner. If this is not done any and every Government policy would fall to the 
ground.

