<!--start metadata-->
Title: The drought
Description: radio talks
Date: 20/10/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              Q.,c,i(of6'







       MINISTER FOR THE ARMY














                      M.P.














HAREEM.              PARLIAMENT HOUSE
VICTORIA             CANBERRA, A.C.T.
TEL. TARRAYOUKYAN 44 TEL. 72867
                      72868

                       20 October 1967
            THE DROUGHT

Statement by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Wannon


     Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Wannon, in a statement made this 
week said that Western Victoria is now in the midst of the worst drought on 
record. The effect of this is much more severe than was the case with previous 
droughts, not only because wool prices have fallen but because many farmers 
have been pushing the carrying capacity of their properties to.the limit. These 
heavy stock numbers have pretty well exhausted farm fodder reserves and are going 
to entail very heavy selling. At least, he said, this had been his experience 
from what he had found at home.

     The State is now in negotiation with the Commonwealth over the form 
of drought assistance that should be given. Earlier this week, in answer to a 
question in the Parliament, the Prime Minister said that he had advised the 
Victorian Premier that any request for specific assistance would be given 
sympathetic and speedy attention. And on Thursday, 19 October, in answer to another 
question in the Parliament, the Prime Minister announced that a meeting was to be 
held on Monday, 23 October. He also said that the Commonwealth was prepared to 
make a financial advance but that the extent of the advance could be better 
determined after the official meeting.

      The general policy that the Commonwealth has adopted on natural 
disaster relief will apply to the Victorian requests. The Prime Minister also 
said that if Victoria felt that measures similar to those adopted by the 
Commonwealth in assisting N.S.W., and Queensland were considered appropriate 
by the Victorian Government, the Commonwealth would examine it on that basis. 
The Prime Minister gave an assurance that Victorian requests would be treated 
as a matter of urgency.

      Mr. Fraser then went on the set out in some detail the form of 
assistance that was provided to N.S.W. and Queensland. It should be noted, 
he said, that the Commonwealth takes the view that the State Government is in 
the best position to assess the conditions in their own states and thus, to 
estimate the needs of people affected by the disaster. The Commonwealth also 
recognises, of course, that the States have limited financial resources and thus, 
a large scale disaster such as that which is affecting Western Victoria or that 
which occurred when bushfires swept Tasmania will necessarily call for
Commonwealth assistance.

      Because it is the State that is in a position to assess the needs of 
a particular area, it is also up to the State to tell the Commonwealth what it 
needs. This would lead to discussion between Treasury officials and then to a 
decision by the Governments concerned.

              2.


      In the cases of N.S.W. and Queensland the Commonwealth reimbursed 
the States for the full amount of their expenditure on certain relief measures.
These fell into four categories:

        Loans by the States for carry—on and restocking
        purposes where credit is not available through normal 
        commercial channels. The States are making these loans 
        available to farmers (including share farmersl at an 
        interest rate of about 3 per cent, repayable over 7 
        years but with no repayments (or payments of interest) 
        in the first two years. Carry—on loans, which are 
        designed to enable farmers to meet the cost of essential 
        carry—on requirements (fodder, household stores, etc.) 
        are normally subject to a maximum of $6,000 per farmer. 
        In general the farmer must be able to show that he has 
        a reasonable prospect of continuing in business. 
        Restocking loans are subject to a maximum of $10,000.

      b. Rebates on freight on the transport of fodder and water 
        to drought—affected areas, of starving stock out of 
        drought—affected areas and of stock back to areas
        recovered from the drought. In the case of rail transport 
        which farmers are ecpected to use if possible, the freight 
        rebate is normally from 50-75 per cent. However, in some 
        cases, for example the transport of gifts of fodder from 
        one state to another and special movements of wheat, 
        the full freight costs have been met. Road transport 
        costs were also subsidised, although to a lesser extent.

       c. Grants by the States to local councils and other 
        authorities were also reimbursed by the Commonwealth. 
        The main purpose of these grants is to maintain employ- 
        ment in drought—affected areas. They are designed to 
        enable people to be employed who are not able to find 
        work because of the drought.

       d. Miscellaneous expenditure by the States. This included 
        the running costs of additional cloud seeding operations 
        and special measures designed to maintain water supplies 
        in drought—affected areas.

       Commonwealth drought assistance has also been reinforced by action 
 through the banking system and there is now a standing instruction from the 
 Reserve Bank to the Trading Banks to make sure that they operate as freely as 
 possible in drought—affected areas, The Reserve Bank keeps close contact with

•



                      3.


        all trading banks in drought—affected areas to make sure that their policies 
        do not inhibit sympathetic consideration being given to demands for finance 
        arising from the drought.

             In 1966 the Commonwealth also established within the banking system 
        the Farm Development Loan Fund which has enabled the trading banks to make long- 
        term loans to primary producers for the development of farms, including the 
        mitigation of droughts.

             Taxation measures have also been introduced to assist drought— 
        affected producers. As a'result of the drought in parts of N.S.W. and Queensland 
        some producers had two wool clips in one year. Arrangements were made whereby 
        they would not be taxed on both of these in the one year but the taxation would 
        be apread over two years. The limit on the carry—forward period for deduction 
        of losses by primary producers has been removed and profit from the forced sale 
        of livestock can be spread over five years, thus limiting the taxation burden in 
        cases where the funds are used for the maintenance of a breeding flock or herd or 
        for the replacement of previously sold stock. In addition, the averaging system 
        for income tax purposes has been broadened to enable many more farmers to take 
        advantage of it.

             In 1965/66 the Commonwealth spent a total of $21,700,000 on 
        reimbursements to N.S.W. and Queensland for their expenditures on drought relief 
        measures. In 1966/67 the figure was nearly $18 million and this year provision 
        has been made in the budger for payment to N.S.W. and Queensland of $7,750,000 
        for this purpose.

             Mr. Fraser said that an important meeting is being held atCasterton 
        on the 27 October to discuss the drought. Unfortunately, he has a very long- 
        standing and unbreakable Army engagement near Sydney on that day but Tony Street, 
        the Federal Member for Corangamite, whose electorate is also badly affected by 
        the drought, will be present. He will have full information .about what the 
        Commonwealth has done in other droughts and will pay close attention to all the 
        views that will be expressed.

