<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australia praised in Vietnam
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 26/04/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                 ~


                             No. 4842
                         Directorate of Public Relations, 
                         Army Headquarters, 
                         CANBERRA, A.C.T.

              AUSTRALIA PRAISED IN VIT NAM
      Australian troops received unsolicited high praise from Vietnamese 
 villagers in Phuoc Tuy Province last week.

      A formal report compiled through Vietnamese and American civilian 
 agency sources gives a new insight to villagers feelings on the Australian 

 Task Force - its presence and the job it is doing to assist the Vietnamese.

      A barbed wire fence running south-east across the province and 
 designed to restrict movement of Viet Cong and sympathisers has "stirred 
 the interest and admiration of local residents",

      "It is remarkable to note," says the report, "that the Vietnamese 
 talk highly of the Australians and praise them profusely. "

      "The reasons attributed to the respect given the Australians are:
      • They are a hard working lot.
      • They are always fair, well behaved and courteous 

        with the people of the Province.
        Their civic action programme is realistic and

        coincides with the people's needs."
     "Normally," the report states, "the people of the villages are 

quick to find fault and criticise programmes and projects."

     "But with the way the Australians go about implementing their 
projects on civic action and anti-guerilla warfare, they are proving 

exceptions to the general rule, in every Vietnamese mind and attitude.
     "The friendly frame of mind of the Vietnamese for the Australians 
is based on the following factors:

     • The Australians are crafty fighters, killing many Viet Cong 

       in jungle battles, pursuing the enemy relentlessly; 

       The Australian civic action programme is very effective 
       in that they fill the immediate needs of the people, and 

       in the process of giving exact no promises from the people or 
       make them feel under obligation;

  r
~

                    -2
         The Australians have promoted friendship with the 
         Vietnamese in general by their good behaviour and 
         unpretentious courtesy.
       The attitudes of the people of Phuoc Tuy Province shown in the 
   report this week were gathered from a series of discussions and interviews 
   with villagers by Vietnamese specialists.
       Known as a weekly attitude report the views of the people of the 
   villagers are sought regularly to assist in solving their problems and
   meeting their needs.
       Through such surveys and reports the efforts of the Vietnamese 
   Government and allied agencies can do much to raise the level of 
   contentment among the people and by meeting the immediate needs help 
   reduce Viet Cong influence.


                      Lists: A, B and C 
                      Further information:
                 CANBERRA: Major Allan S. Hinds
                       (65-4061) (49-6030)
               OTHER; STATES: ATP AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

   26 April 1967

