<!--start metadata-->
Title: Indonesia
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 4/05/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                   '113 ,j-
                                          GMLSIA.                                  2/6
     rBy: Malcolm Fpase Member for anno411.•^•••••^••=ire

                  All Australians must be disturbed et the unhappy events
that have taken place in Indon,sia over the last few months.
Indonesia is very near home. It Is difficult to see any easy solution 
to the Indonesian problem but if we know a little of the background 
of the present rebellion it may make it easier for US to understand 
why that rebellion he taken place.
                  Indonesia is composed of several different islands
including Java, Sumatra and the Celebes For a long time there has 
been dissatisfoction in the outer islands with the oentral administration 
of Java which it is claimed has not been giving them enough attention 
or en adequate share of the national income. For example, Sumatra con- 
tributes over 70% of all Indonesia's exports yet the Sumatrans believe 
 that Java gets most of the feweign exchange earned by thole tworts and 
that, as a result, Sumatra's own development has been neglected. This 
kind of belief is widely held throughout the other islands of Indonesia. 
 There hers therefore been a pressing demand for a greeter delegation of 
 authority from Java to the outer islands - a decentralisation of 
 government. Whatever our own opinion may be of it, it is one of thm 

 facts that has led to the present Indonesian situation.
                   In addition to these things, ovei the laLt few months 
 there h3s been a rapid deterioration in Indonesia's economic position. 
 Indonesian nationalismmay have well Inspired the Djakarta Government 
 to expel Dutch business men and to take over Dutch assets in Indonesia. 
 But quiLe clearly this kind of action is against the economic; well-being 
 of the Indonesian people. Very largely, as a result of this action, 
 Indonesia's external trade has dropped almost to nothing and the 

  Indonesians have, at times, found it extremely difficult to replace 
  Dutch Managers and Dutch technicians.
                   Communism itself has added to the troubles in Indonesia. 
  In 1955, at their national elections, theCommunIst Party won 23P 
  of all the votes in Java but in the p ovincial and municipal elections

of lest July, the Com unlit vote increased to 55$. There has been 
continuous Ares, ure o Y-resident üoekerno to iuolude the Communist 
Party in tho Coveanment. The ecc e; is disintegration of the country 
end the pressure which eai ent Idoeccurno hoe himself averted to 
include Communists in the Govern:a to have been the two things which 
have most directly led to the rebellion in Sumatra.
            Again„ I um not canting on the rights ++err wrongs of 
this particular aituation. It is just plainly the reoorrc..e : tract. 
It is true also th, t the Coot uni.rats in J6 Va have ben most vocal 
in asking for a ruthleea suppression or all the revolutionaries, 
in asking for the extermination, whoa surely sensible people would 
have considered this problem to be settled by mediation und con 
                                                            -oilie+tion. laven though the Communists have played quite a consider- 
able part inthe present situation and even though out of this 
rebellion they hope to gain some direct share in the Government of 
that country, it is also quite impossible to say that one aide is 
Communist and one is not. The rebels are quite clearly anti- 
communist and the Djakarta Coverauena i self e xitdaa aany people 
who are equally opposed to Coamtli ex . "ace further oonfusee the 
general issues involved in Indoneele.
            It is not a question of medieti©XL by of r c ountri s 
at the present time. if mediation were .prt otieai by _en outside 
body it would surely be a job to be í elegutod through ttac United 
Nations end I would have thought that this kind of approuch would 
have been made by people sua porting the United i atior,e and who
believe in madi.ation for Indonesia. However, Dr. Nett has 
suggested that the australien Covcan. t should offer to eacliate 
directly star in Indonesia. In thin respect we would bis by-passing 
the United Nations, end secondly, it i nores the feet that we co 
not be successful for the simple reason that the Djakarta regime, 
when they first heard of Dr. "v ttt, e sOggestions said : "We want 
none of it. We went no outside interference." The t was about e 
month ego. I was all the more surprised therefore when, in the 
debate on Inteanational Affairs, Dr. vetr ignored the rejection 
by the Djakarta or Central Dovernmen in Indonesia end said that we

         alone and by ourse     to negotiate.
               apart from this, I would have thought that if day
country was     to be chosen by tte United Nations to act, as a 
mediator it would be better to get a country with no direct interest 
in this ÿbrtioulsr area. ?Aistxalia is quite obviously interested 
in the South SBstern I aoific, not only for our own Continent but also 
for New Guinea. we could therefore be regarded Qs an interested 
mediator. It would be ajnb, I believe, for some other country
 ith an obviouely imparsana:l viewpoint on the problems to be settled. 
          I have said that Australians 4annat help being uneasy 
       itustion in Indonesia and we deplore the fact thfrt a 
         in its true sense a taken place' but .tcnowing o litte
        story of the islands e turbulent political history,
 the occupation by the Japanese during; the r and their recent 
     um from Dutch control; when vo see the economic troubles 
       ve beset the islands an the use which the Communists
       e of whose troubles - when we learn these things we can, 
   naps undersúaud a little of what is happening. l'or the present 
   is best for ue to stand aside and hope that the Indonesian people
          their (AU problems on a permanent basis which will restore 
          omit) stability and prosperity to all the Indonesian
 people.


      91

