<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool sales
Description: press statement
Date: 21/09/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


             PRESS STATEMENT
                                                        September 21st,1961


                        Yesterday, a press statement was released by the
             Managing Director of Portland Wool Brokers Ltd. in which he published 
              the fact that the Australian Council of woolbuyers has authorised 
             written instructions which have been issued to individual members 
              throughout Australia that such members may not attend or support, 
             directly or indirectly, the Portland market.
                        I very deeply regret the action that has been taken by 
             the Australian Council of Woolbuyers and will do everything I can to
             persuade nationally minded buyers to attend at Portland.
             The clock can't be put back.  The harbour has been built at 
             Portland; there is a good wool store and a company has been formed
             to conduct sales and sales must go forward. western Victoria 
             and south-eastern South Australia must maintain their determination
             in the face of this move.   It would be a tragedy if the brokers 
             and the buyers were allowed to prevent the sales being a success 
             because it is not just a question of wool sales at Portland, wool 
             sales will lead to other things, they are merely the first step 
•            in the establishment of Portland as a full industrial and commercial 
             centre.

                         I strongly support the view taken by ir. Buchanan that
             Portland is the natural outlet for produce for Western victoria 
             and southeast of South Australia, and for this reason no artificial 
             ban will prevent the establishment of Portland as a woolselling 
             centre.
                          Together with the PortlandWool Brokers I hope and
             believe that a majority of buyers will realize the part that 
             Portland is destined to play and will thus not feel too strongly
             bound by the Council's decision. However, the action that has 
             been taken by the Australian Council of b oolbuyers raises two 
•            questions of great importance.

                           'firstly, as things stand in the wool industry at the
             present time it appears that the brokers and the buyers have the 
             power if they choose to use it to say where sales should or should
             not be held.  The attempted use of this power has led to a bitter 
             conflict at Goulburn and I sincerely hope that the plain good sense 
             of the majority of buyers will prevent this kind of fighting arising
             about Portland.  However, the question should be examined as to 
             whether the brokers and the buyers should have this power to dictate
             the place and timing of wool sales. In my view there should be 
             some overall body on which growers could also be represented and 
             through which agreement could be reached without the public dissension
             and argument.  If such a committee had existed prior to the 
             establishment of Portland Wool Brokers the determination of the 
             Victorian Wheat and Woolgrowers' Association, the Australian 
             Primary Producers' Union and the Graziers' Association might well 
             have prevented opposition by the National Council of Woolselling 
             Brokers and the Australian Council of Woolbuyers.

                                          2



                         Secondly, in addition to this, I am placing this new 
             evidence before the Attorney-General, Sir Garfield Barwick, asking 
             him to examine as a matter of urgency whether or not an organization 
             like the Australian Council of bdoolbuyers should be allowed to have 
             the power that it has over its members to tell them which sales they
             should or should not attend.  On my information this body has
             this power at the present time.  I don't think an Organization 
             should be allowed to exercise power in this way, and this is a 
             matter that I hope might be limited once Restrictive Practices 
             legislation is introduced in conjunction with the States.
                         Now more than ever it will be up to the growers to make
             sure these sales are going to be a success.  If growers are 
             determined they will not be dictated to and if a sufficient number 
             can send a sufficient quantity of good wool to Portland I am 
             confident the sales will be successful.
•                         Growers should remember that if the worst happened 
             and if they sent their wool to Portland and if the buyers did not 
             attend they would still be able to ship their wool to London and 
             have it sold, in many cases, before it would get into the regular
             sales held by old established Brokers in Australia. This makes 
             it possible for the growers' position to be safeguarded, and this 
             is important when many growers are operating near the margin of 
             profit at the present time.







•

