<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government budget
Description: Electoral radio talk
Date: 29/09/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR INFORMATION      EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m. Sunday
                         29th September,1974

  ELECTORAL RADIO TALK BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON

Last week I spoke about the main thrust of the budget which is basically 
socking the private sector of the economy to expand Government spending 
by well over 30% by $3,500,000.

I think I should deal on this occasion with some of the details of the 
budget as they affect us. It would hardly be surprising that the rural 
communities did not rate a worthwhile mention. Exporters are the for- 
gotten people so far as this Government is concerned.

But there are a number of detailed proposals which are not particularly 
pleasing. For example, the Government has pretended that there are real 
cuts in income tax. A person earning $100 per week is now paying about 
$17 a week in tax. The budget is based on a 22% inflation. When wages 
are raised to $120 at the end of the year, he will be paying an extra 
$6 a week more. That will more than wipe out any tax cut. Income tax 
collection from the income tax wage earners will be up by more than 
$46,000,000 by the end of the year.

The Government decided to introduce a narrow-minded and quite vicious 
proposal to put a 10% surcharge on all income which the Government 
classes an unearned income. Thus a man works hard and invests $1000 
in bonds, he will pay an extra 10% surcharge on that $1000.

The part about this additional tax which I particularly dislike however, 
concerns people who are retired. By the definition of the Government 
all their income is unearned.

Why should people who are retired pay tax at a higher rate than those 
who are still earning? Many of them are already being impoverished by 
inflation. The value of their savings is being cut in half every five 
years. The Government's new tax on unearned income is a petty class 
conscious measure which few people would approve.

Reducing the income tax deduction for education expenditure for children 
will hit tens of thousands of tax payers whose children go to Government 
or independent schools. It will, in particular, hit people who live in 
country areas and whose children have to travel or board, because they 
live a significant distance from school.

There is going to be a capital gains tax. Nobody yet knows how this is 
going to work but we do know that when a person dies and leaves a pro- 
perty,.capital gains tax will be paid in addition to death duties.

P.M.G. Charges

Postal and telephone charges have ofcourse been increased. Letters 
will now cost 10 cents, local call fees will be up, service connections 
and rental fees for telephones are also going to be increased. It will 
now cost $80 for a new applicant to have a telephone connected.

Documents are available which give full details of the charges concern- 
ing P.M.G. charges. If anyone i,! sto see a copy, I have some available.

There are some proposals in the budget which if taken singly and by 
themselves will ofcourse have the approval of many people. The budget 
is in many senses a handout budget to many groups throughout Australia, 
but especially to those who live in Melbourne and Sydney.

Many Australians are coming to ask whether the Government can really 
continue behaving in this way without running the country into bank- 
ruptcy. It is not the Government's money, it is yours. It is easy 
for Governments to be generous at somebody elses' expense, especially 
when they are paying for it by inflation.

Devaluation

Since the budget was introduced, the Government has devalued the Aus- 
tralian dollar by 1.2%. This will be some marginal help to exporters. 
However, last year inflation was 16%, this year the Government is 
counting in its budget on inflation of over 20%, probably 40% in two 
years. In addition to that, over the last two years the Australian 
dollar has been revalued upwards by 30%. If anyone expects a deval- 
uation of 12% to recover the competitive position of export industries 
against these other charges then they are going to be sadly mistaken.

If the Government had had devaluation in mind when it introduced the 
budget it should have introduced an entirely different budget. The 
budget chiefly was one of expanding Government expenditure and reduced 
private expenditure. Because the budget as a whole has had an adverse 
or unfavourable impact on general confidence in Australia, it will, 
I believe, lead to much higher unemployment, to more inflation and to 
a further deterioration in the balance of payments.

If devaluation was in mind Government expendituresshould have been 
drastically reduced and exporters and businesses and individuals
should have been encouraged to expand their activities, to work better, 
but there was no such encouragement in this budget.

A.C.T.U./ Mr Hawke

Last week I also said something about the social compact which Mr Hawke 
has been trying to work out with the Trade Union movement. I said that
                            ../3

                                                                                        3.





I thought he would have a difficult time in persuading the Trade Union 

movement that this budget created the ground work for restraint. The

unions have spelt out their demands very plainly. They are not entirely


moderate.



The Trade Union movement has decided to call for import quotas, taxation


 indexation, cuts in indirect taxe~automatic           rates.adjustments    thatforreallyin-
 come earners and a lowering of interest 


 seems to indicate Trade Union Tacc acceptance owell the beuheaded foraaresult,

 the union movement and the Government may

 clash. I hope it does not occur. If it does all Australians will


 suffer.










                                             .o0o.

