<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 17/03/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•

             PRESS STATEMENT:

             MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                     March 17th,1962


                            Last week, the Government withstood its first major attack. 
             The vote, as expected, was a close one, 60-59.

                            The first censure motion moved by the Opposition might not 
             be as important as some press reports have led people to believe. The 
             Opposition did not really expect to win. They knew the Government had the 
             numbers. Some leading members of the Opposition are reported to think that 
             there would be more chance of defeating the Government during the Budget 
             session next spring. If the results of this recent censure motion are any 
             guide, I doubt if this is so. The Opposition members who think in this way 
             base their hopes on the belief that the Government's economic measures will 
             not restore the economy to a proper degree of confidence and activity. 
             These hopes, I think, are without foundation. There were very significant 
             up-turns in production in some of our major commodities, especially iron and 
             steel, in January, and in January, the number of motor cars sold were an all- 
             time record for that particular month.

                            The Government measures have now come in behind this up-turn 
             in production that was beginning and will reinforce it, and there is already 
             evidence of renewed confidence and optimism throughout industry. The 
             employment figures should rapidly improve. It is worth noting that the 
             actual number of people in employment has continued to rise throughout the 
             spring and summer months. However, the great numbers of school leavers 
             who registered for work over the Christmas and summer periods was much 
             greater than the increased demand for labour at that time and thus the 
             numbers of unemployed became worse in the months of December and January. 
             The Minister for Labour has confidently predicted that the figure for 
             February will show the greatest drop of any month since the great coal strike 
             of 1949. The future will show whether he is correct or not.

                            I think the Opposition made a cardinal error in their censure 
             motion. They made it difficult for the members of the general public to 
             understand what they were trying to do. The full motion of censure would 
             nearly have filled one of my normal Sunday night talks. The Opposition 
             tried to cover the whole field instead of concentrating on what they
             believed to be one or two of the weakest points in the Government's perform-
             ance. They dissipated their attack in every direction.      This is, of 
             course, a matter of opinion and a matter of tactics, but if I had been in 
             Opposition under such circumstances I would have tried to emphasise and 
             highlight one or two points and really drive them home to the people. 
             However, this was not done.

                            In making it a wide and unrestricted motion, the Opposition, 
             in fact, tried to re-fight the election of December, 1961. Having gone as 
             far as this, having chosen a broad front for the battle, they should have 
             made quite sure that there were no significant gaps in the censure motion. 
             They did not do this.

                            Quite significantly, the Opposition motion did not mention 
             foreign policy or defence. It neglected these while it mentioned every 
             item of financial and monetary policy; of social policy; of relationships 
            with the States and matters of national development - particularly the
             development of Northern Australia.    Because of this further error in the 
            framing of their censure motion, the Government speakers were able to charge 
             the Opposition with lack of concern for the defence of Australia and for 
            foreign policy in a year in which most vital decisions might be taken in 
            our near north.


                                                                                /2.

                                                            4101112


                            In framing its motion the Opposition had thought that the 
Government members might show a lack of cohesion and unity, considering the 
recent reduction in numbers which the Government suffered. This was not 
so. While the Opposition attack roamed over the whole field that I have 
mentioned, excluding defence and foreign policy, the defence and counter 
attack of the Government members showed a strength, a unity and a sense of 
dedication which I had not seen in my six years of Parliament. The 
Government members have certainly closed their ranks in a determination to 
fight for the things in which they believe.

                           The Opposition has made another mistake and it is, perhaps, 
a natural one. They came to this Parliament, some of them thinking that 
they had won the election considering the great reduction they had made in 
the Governmentts majority. The fact of the matter is the Government still 
has a majority. Even though some commentators have, in public, called it 
a Government defeat, the result was, in fact, still a Government victory 
even though it was a victory by the narrowest of all possible margins.

                           The life and future of this Parliament is certainly 
unpredictable. It is always possible for a person to get sick; for a 
'plane to arrive late at Canberra with members of the Government Parties 
on board. Any one of these or a number of other unforseen..things could 
occur that could cause the defeat of the Government. However, this cannot 
be foretold. On the other hand, if the Government members continue to 
fight and counter attack as they did through this censure motion, the 
Government could endure for a very considerable period. It is not generally 
known that the Tasmanian Government, the West Australian Government and, at 
times, the Victorian Government, have survived with a majority of one. 
Governments in these States have survived and have gone on to regain their 
strength. There is no reason why this should not happen at Canberra and 
many reasons why it may.

                           The Government made it quite clear that it is going to stand 
or fall on its own merits. It would not wish to survive merely because of 
the illness of an Opposition member. Alan Bird, who is extremely ill, was 
offered a pair. However, Mr. Bird, who has a great sense of duty, wished 
to be sworn in and so he came to Canberra but if similar circumstances 
arise again, the Government's offer would stand. It may be, however, that 
the Opposition did not accept the Government's offer in this matter thinking 
it would place the Opposition under an obligation if one of the Government 
members became ill.

                           There is no doubt that the twenty-fourth Parliament is a more 
interesting one and a more vital one because each member has an important 
part to play. This was not so when the Government had a majority of 32. 
It will be interesting to watch the future.

