<!--start metadata-->
Title: Gulf of Tonkin
Description: press statement
Date: 23/08/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  ti   PRESS STATEMENT s


       MALCOLM FRASER ;


                                                              August 23rd,1964


                                   "GULF OF TONKIN"


                   The most recent crisis in South Vietnam has now quietened. 
        It is most likely that there will be many more crises in this area.

                   People have been asking why the North Vietnam gunboats attacked 
       destroyers of the United States 7th Fleet because this seems difficult to
        understand.   It was clear that such an attack could not be thoroughly 
       successful, and it might appear to the casual observer that it was a silly
       thing for the North Vietnamese to do.  I have even seen one commentator
       suggest that the North Vietnamese were getting jittery, that they were 
       expecting an invasion and that they thought they had better do what they
       could. Such an analysis really makes nonsense of the facts.   If the North 
       Vietnamese were jittery or fearful of what the United States might do, they 
       could at one stroke destory any threat to themselves by keeping out of the
       South Vietnam conflict. Nobody would be interested in what the North 
110    Vietnamese did within their own boundaries if they stopped sending troops 
       and equipment into South Vietnam. Since they have shown no signs of this 
       I cannot believe that this abortive attack was undertaken from fear of some 
       invasion.

                   There is a much more likely explanation, and one that I have not
       seen published.   In the past six months the United States has toughened her 
       policy in South Vietnam and in south-east Asia. This has been done deliber- 
       ately. The Communists were making advances in Laos and in South Vietnam - 
       they were flagrantly breaking agreements that were meant to ensure the 
       neutrality of these areas. It was clear that a greater involvement by the 
       United States was going to be necessary. For the first time in ten years 
       I believe the United States has contemplated the use of ground forces on the 
       mainland of Asia. For the decade to May, 1964, the United States has had 
       a policy of not having ground forces committed to the mainland and, under 
       these circumstances, of course, Peking and Hanoi could go ahead with their 
       plans for subversion and conquest of south-east Asia.

                   The United States has done several things to make it well known
       that her policy has changed, that she has become stronger and tougher. 
       Various operations have been undertaken in and over Laos. The Secretary of
       State and the President had changed the tone of their statements. It was 
       necessary for the United States to do this because it is no good having a 
       policy based on strength if your opponents do not believe it; if they do 
       not believe that you have a policy of strength they will miscalculate - they 
       will think they can get away with things which you are determined to stop, 
       and nothing would lead more quickly to war.

                   Some sort of message about this changed United States policy 
       has obviously got through to Peking and Hanoi, but it would be a fairly 
       legitimate question for them to ask themselves - "Has the United States 
       really changed her policy? Is she now really determined to act from 
       strength? If pressed, how will the United States respond? Will she just 
       speak, or will she use force?"

                   It would be reasonable to expect that Peking and Hanoi would want
       to test this changed United States policy for themselves. If they did want 
       to test it for themselves the operation in the Gulf of Tonkin starts to make 
       sense.


                                                                          /2

                                          - 2



                    There are several things about this particular naval battle that
        are difficult to understand.    The torpedo boats missed the destroyers.    I 
        am told that with modern torpedoes you either get close enough to hit a 
        destroyer or you let the torpedoes go too far away` I am also told that 
        if the torpedo boats did press their attack close enough to hit a destroyer 
        it is unlikely that they themselves would survive. Since the torpedo boats 
        missed the destroyers and were not themselves all destroyed, it would appear 
        that they did nct press their attack too closely. This, too, would be 
        consistent with the suggestion that I have put forward; that this whole 
        operation was mounted by the North Vietnamese and the Chinese quite deliberately 
        to test the strength and the resolution of the United States:

                    There was an interesting sideline to, this particular episode.
        You may have seen a report in last Wednesday's paper that Dr; Cairns had handed 
        over a cheque for £100 to a certain charity. This was the result of a
.       challenge he issued in the Parliament.     The argument arose over a statement 
        reported in the "Age" of August 10th, where Dr. Cairns was reported as having 
        said = "No one can properly claim that America is being attacked or that what 
        is being done is being done in self-defence. This would be different if the 
        North Vietnamese torpedo boats were on the other side of the Pacific:"
        Dr. Cairns had said in the Parliament that he would give £100 to any charity 
        in this country if it could be proved that he had used those words, or if a 
        newspaper could be produced that had printed them. . Of course, the fact 
        that the speech was reported in almost identical terms in three newspapers 
        does not prove that Dr. Cairns said what was reported in the newspapers, but 
        he did pay up the £100 because these words were published.



                                   --------000

