<!--start metadata-->
Title: First tracker dogs in Vietnam
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 21/04/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  FOR PRESS                           . 484o
                                  rectorate of Public Relations, 
                                 Army Headquarters, 
                                 CANBERRA, A.C.T.

                FIRST TRACKER DOGS IN VIET NAM

        The first tracker war dogs to be used by troops of the Australian 
  Task Force have arrived in Viet Nam.

        Two Black Labradors with soldier handlers - Lance Corporal Norman 

 Cameron of Kingston, South Australia and Private Thomas Blackhurst of 
 Swansea, New South Wales - from the 7th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, 

 are now undergoing orientation and acclimatisation training at the Task 
 Force Base, Nui Dat, in Phuoc Tuy Province.

       The dogs will be used by the Australian troops to search Viet Cong 
 areas and jungle base zones, follow up blood trails of wounded enemy

 troops, and assist patrols to flush out enemy from jungle hides and 
 Viet Cong dominated villages.

       Named Justin and Cassius, the dogs were bred and trained for their 
 war role both at the Infantry Centre, Ingleburn, New South Wales, and

 with the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, at Woodside, South 
 Australia.

       Their trainers in Australia and the soldiers who trained the two 
 handlers for Viet Nam duty were in many cassa soldiers who had served 
 in Malaya during the Emergency.

       War dogs such as the two who have arrived in Viet Nam trere used 

 successfully by Australian and other Commonwealth forces in the Malayan 
 jungles and large numbers of Australian troops were given specialist 

 training at the Jungle Warfare School, Kota Tinggi, Johore State, Malaya.

      Now for the first time since Australian troops have been committed 

to the war in Viet Nam home-bred tracker dogs will be working with Task 
Force units in search and clear operations against the Viet Cong.


                                Lists: A and B
                                Further information:
                        CANBERRA: Major Allan S. Hinds
                                  (65-4061) (49-6o30)
                    OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS
21 April 1967

