<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural reconstruction, primary industry
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 4/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                   3YB   THURSDAY  5TH APRIL 1973
BROADVXST                          3 ! WE ] ESDAY  4TH APRIL 1973
                    r  -g
Many of you know that I am concerned about the future of the rural
community.  We are fortunate that prices are at the moment good for our 
major export products, because a number of other factors are moving
against us.   We have had two successive revaluations. We have positive 
moves for a 35—hour week and positive moves for wage increases — which 
I would support if I believed they were going to add to the real standards 
of living of the people concerned, and not merely push up the cost
structure in the whole community.

We have had the rural reconstruction funds cut in half, and attempts made
to increase the rate of interest. Even though prices are better, it is still 
important for people to consolidate their positions, so that they will be 
better able to withstand difficult circumstances in the future. We have 
seen funds for research and promotion for the International Wool
Secretariat held up because the new Government has not supported decisions 
that we made and announced to the Australian Wool Industry Conference well
before the last election. As a result, wool industry and the research 
bodies are in a state of wonder and doubt about the future. There are 
prospects that Government research funds will be cut and the wheat 
industry leaders are already in difficulty with Government and Treasury 
officials over a negotiation of a new stabilisation plan. We have also 
got Mr. Cameron's unwillingness to reverse the levy which is doing so 
much damage to Portland's, and to other decentralised ports' general 
cargo trade.

If these events had occurred with the prices at last year's levels, the 
result would have been utter disaster. Their long term consequences can 
still be immensely serious.

All this leads to the point that there is a necessity to maintain a strong 
rural voice throughout Australia. We are the most centralised country in 
the world, and if we are to establish an electoral system which transfers 
a significant number of seats from the country to the city, then you are 
going to add to the demands to spend more funds in the great cities, and

 2.

 and reduce the prospects of achieving proper support for rural areas.

 Primary Industry groups, and all people who live in rural communities might 
 regard the matters I have mentioned as important, but an event that 
 occurred last week is more important than all. This is the Government's
 Electoral Bill.  It is a bill that is designed to increase the number of
 city based Members of Parliament. It's a bill that would significantly
 weaken the rural voice in the Parliament. Maybe that is not surprising
 when Al Grassby and Rex Patterson — both with a knowledge and concern 
 for rural matters — were both denied the prospects of managing primary
 industry matters in the new Government. The Government's measure will 
 reduce the number of country seats by six or seven.

 They want to do this by two simple measures.  The Distribution Commissioners
 can now vary the number of voters in an electorate by up to 20% of the
 quota.  They want to reduce that variation to 10%. In addition the bill 
 seeks to delete from the criteria which the Commissioners take into 
 account, any reference to distances, sparseness of population, or area.

 If the Government's measures were implemented, I have no doubt that rural 
 seats would be larger in population than the seats on the outskirts of 
 Melbourne or Sydney, and if there is anyone who doubts that, I can take 
 them through the proposed amendments and demonstrate it in detail. This 
 is a matter of concern for everyone who lives in rural communities. It is 
 often difficult for people in cities to understand the problems of people
 who live in the remoter areas. If we are to have a redistribution of 
 the kind envisaged by the Government, it will be impossible for people to 
be properly represented.

 The Liberal Party will be opposing this measure with all the resources at 
its command. The Country Party will be opposing,it. I believe thr D.L.P.
will be opposing it.  We have made up our minds that it will be opposed
in the House of Representatives and in the Senate. If it is introduced a 
second time and leads to a double dissolution, then so be it, because we 
will not change our view. It is a bad measure, and one which will do
great harm to the national Parliament.

It is interesting that the main provision the Government wants to remove

•3 .
 has been in the Electoral Act since 1902. In the Federal sphere, the 
 redistributions have always hitherto been regarded as fair. In most 
 countries the electoral laws allow for significant variations from the 
 average to take account of community, of interest and many of the factors
 that are in our present law.

 Perhaps the ultimate test of the fairness of the redistributions that 
 we have introduced is that for the first time in which the Labor 
 Government has had a majority of votes ti.moillieade, it won government,
 and that is what happened in 1972. In all the other elections the 
 Labor Party failed to win government because it failed to win 50% of
 the votes.  These circumstances must be the real test of the justice 
 and fairness of an electoral system.

RADIO TALK
The first budget of the Australian Labor Party was a black 
budget for everyone who lives in rural communities. 
Before the last election, a number of promises had been
made and I think that we would remember them. They have
all been put aside. Actions that the Government has taken
troughout the course of this year have been hostile to the
interests of the rural community, but there are many people
who hope that the Government would recognise that a proper
balance needs to be maintained within the Australian community,
and that therefore policies would evolve that would assist
people who live outside the great cities.
Having listened to the budget, we know that that won't happen.
Let's look at the decisions that were announced in the budget.
There is an extra 5¢ per gallon on petrol for everyone.
This is a highly inflationary measure because it will be
added on to transport costs. It hits all people who live in
the country much more than those who live in the cities who
have available to them either public transport or who only
have to travel short distances.
In addition, another 20 a gallon will be added on in many
country areas because of the change in the equalisation scheme,
which, under the previous Government, kept the price in the
country within 30 of city prices.
Telephone charges and rentals have been increased. All rentals
are going to be at the maximum rate and that will be a rise
of 100; for most country people. This is quite unjust, especially

                    2

in view of the fact that in the cities subscribers have 
local call access to millions whilst those in country 
areas have local call access to some hundreds. The 
Government has abolished the provision in which the 
Department was progressively going to take over at 
Departmental expense the construction of lines of all 
subscribers within fifteen miles of an exchange. They 
have reduced that provision to within five miles of an 
exchange. The previous arrangement which we introduced 
some ,years ago was done to give some degree of equality 
to people in remote areas. The Government has taken 
this move without any sensitivity or nderstanding of
the problems of people who live large distances
from the towns and cities.
Country newspapers will be very hard hit. They depend
on postage, unlike city newspapers which can be hand-delivered.
I believe many will find it difficult to continue in
business. With Doug Anthony,I pissed the Postmaster-
General to reverse the decision in the cours ie-of this
last week. He refused and revealed his plain hostility
to rural interests.
Gam, significant feature of the budget was the omission
of any reference of assistance for local government in
country areas. Before the election and during the first
session of Parliament, the Labor Party indicated concern
for the financial difficulties of local Government. There

                       - 3


 is no financial provision made for it in this budget
 and there was not even a mention of Portland as a study 
 centre for decentralisation proposals in a subsequent 
 statement made by the Minister for Urban and Regional 
 Development.
 These things might have been bad enough, but when we 
 look at the changed depreciation allowances, we find 
 that farmers have been tragically hit. The investment 
 allowance on plant and equipment has been abolished. The 
 depreciation allowance on plant and equipment has been 
 seriously cut. These allowances were first introduced 
 to encourage efficiency in Australian farming and they 
 have been very effective in achieving that. ' ,e had a 
 system under which buildings, other than the domestic 
 house, could be written off over a five-year period,
                       -•,       nder t}e new
 arrangements, the depreciation allowa ce will be i; or
 3% a year - an almost useless provision.
 Under the Liberal Government, internal subdivisional
 fences could be written off in the year of expenditure,
 as could vermin proof netting both internal and external
 to the property, and boundary fences could be written
 off over five years. Now they can only be written off
 at 3 or 4% a year - again a useless provision. The
 construction of dams, the provision of water supply for
 stock, could be written off in the year in which expenditure
was undertaken because we recognised that Australia was a
dry continent and stock were often lost because of shortage
                                                .../4

of water, and the farming community needed encouragement to
make better provision for water conservation. That provision
has been abolished. I tried to find out from Treasury what
would be the new provision for dams and earth tanks.
Advice from one quarter was 'nil'; advice from another quarter
was they they 'didn't know"; and advice from another quarter
was that 'it might be 10;x'. If the Treasury doesn't know,
it shows how little consideration has been given to the
consequences of the Government's decision.
We had the provision in which haysheds and silos could be
written off in the year of expenditure. We did this because
fodder conservation on farms needed encouragement, especially
is this important in dought-prone areas. That provision has
been abolished and replaced with a minimal depreciation rate.
When farmers look at these things in detail, when they come
to make judgements concerning the future improvement of
their property, they are going to find that the additional
cost will be very great indeed. This is particularly unfortunate
since incomes are now better and for the first time in a long
while, many farmers are in a position in which they would
have available some funds for farm development and improvement.
I have estimated the total cost that will be put upon the
farming community. When you take the changed depreciation
allowances, increased petrol taxes, increased telephone charges
and the abolition of the dairy subsidy, you will find that
the increased cost to farmers is about $200 million a year.

I thought it important to catalogue these changes. It is
going to take some people some time to work out how much
their own individual positions are being directly affected
by this budget and the closer they go into it, the more
unhappy people will become.
These are the measures that affect individuals and communities.
There are still the major matters in the budget which
affect life in the city and inflation, and I will speak
on those topics in later talks.

