<!--start metadata-->
Title: Political appointments, Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 21/06/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         ELECTORAL TALK                                                       For Sunday 21 June 1975                3HA
                                                                              & Thursday 26 June 1975                3YB




 THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER



 Bass has been a Labor held electorate for most of the past forty 
 years and I certainly am not prepared to forecast an easy win for 
 the Opposition at this stage.

 I have been campaigning hard in the electorate and so has our
 candidate, Kevin Newman.                        I have visted much of the electorate in
 addition to Launceston.                       I have visited Flinders Island, where the 
 farmers have been hurt by the Government's rural policies, and the 
 timber and farming towns of the North East of Tasmania, such as 
 St. Helens, Weldborough, Scottsdale, Derby and Branxholm.

 I have talked to railway workers and to textile and timber workers 
 who are suffering because of the Government's economic policies.

 Despite the allegations of parochialism which the Labor Party is 
 making against the people of Bass, I have been finding them as 
 concerned as any other Australians about the national issues of 
 unemployment, inflation and economic mismanagement, and which 
 affect them as they affect all other Australians.

 The latest allegation by the Labor Party that the people of North 
 Eastern Tasmania are motivated by parochialism instead of proper 
 consideration of issues has come from the Party's Federal Secretary 
 Mr. David Combe. He says that the Bass by-election has no national 
 implications and suggests that the people of Bass should vote for 
 the Labor Party candidate because he was born in the electorate, 
 although he has not lived there for eleven years.

 This sounds to me like a party which is on the run and on the
 defensive.            It would be foolish to proclaim victory in advance of 
 polling day, but it is encouraging nevertheless that the Labor
 Party is resigning itself to defeat by preparing its rationalisations 
 in advance.

 Political Appointments

 The mistake which the Labor strategists are-making is about the 
 very real personal attachment which the Bass electorate developed 
 for Lance Barnard, who, as their Member, was a son following in his 
 father's footsteps.

 Mr. Barnard has resigned his seat to become Ambassador in Stockholm, 
 and it is certainly legitimate to ask why he has chosen to do this
 at such a critical time for the Government.                                      I can only say that it 
must have been because of a very secere disillusionment.

 I have criticised the appointment of the Prime Minister's Principal 
Private Secretary, Mr. Jim Spigelman, to head the Government's 
propaganda department, but I do not criticise Mr. Barnard's 
appointment.

Within limits, it is acceptable practise to appoint leading 
political figures who have given long and loyal service to 
ambassadorial positions. This Government has done it in the past 
and so have Liberal/Country Party Coalition Governments.


                                                                                                                     . . 2

                                                                2.


But these appointments are for fixed terms, and they are without 
political influence.

The appointment of Mr. Spigelman to head the Government's propaganda 
department is different from the appointments of Mr. Freeth to be 
Ambassador in Tokyo or Mr. Armstrong to be High Commissioner in 
London.
It is also more serious than people realise. It is a permanent
appointment, and it is highly influential.

It strikes at the fundamental principle of an impartial public service 
giving impartial instead of political advice, and thus makes it
easier for ministers to justify decisions taken for political reasons.

The Prime Minister has now appointed three former Principal Private 
Secretaries as permanent heads of government departments.
Mr. John Menadue is head of the Prime Minister's Department, and
Dr. Peter Wilenski is head of the Department of Labour & Immigration.

As head of the propaganda department, Mr. Spigelman is in charge of 
an apparatus which is spending hundreds of thousands of dollars 
promoting party political policies, such as welfare services, Medibank 
and legal aid services, through an intensive advertising campaign.

No matter how good the private secretaries in my office, they are not
going to be appointed heads of government departments. I am
committed to maintain the independence of the public service. That 
 is why I have undertaken to restore to the C.S.I.R.O. the Mineral 
and Solar Energy Research Divisions which have been taken away from 
 it in the interests of building up Mr. Connor's empire.

The Opposition Parties will seek to bring down legislation to ensure 
that assaults of this nature on the C.S.I.R.O. cannot take place in 
future without an act of Parliament.

 It will be our prime aim to restore and protect the integrity of 
the Public Service.

