<!--start metadata-->
Title: Impressions of University States foreign policy in South-East Asia
Description: United States visit 1964 - press statement
Date: 5/06/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRESS STATEIVENT

       IviALCOLM FRASER:

                                                          Washington, 
                                                          June 5thml964


                   MALC OLM FR? SER' S IMPRESSIONS OF UÔNITED STATES 
                        FOREIGN POLICY IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA


                    The last two weeks have been a most interesting time to be
       in Washington. This Capital of the United States has, in many ways, been
       pre-occupied with what has been happening in Laos and South Vietnam.
       In Australia, we are much more inclined to be pre-occupied with what
       happens in Indonesia and in the confrontation between Indonesia and Malaysia,
       but in the United States, because of their commitment to South Vietnam
       the main pre-occupation is clearly with South East Asia proper. There
       are many reasons for this  Three United States' Presidents have laid the 
       prestige of this great country on the line so far as South Vietnam is 
       concerned. There seems to be a complete conviction on every side that 
       the United States will do what is necessary to win in South Vietnam. 
       This is an impression I have gained from speaking with people in the
ï      Capital, in the House of Representatives, in the American Senate and 
       speaking to people in the State Department and in the Defence Department. 
       However, if I try to find out what means are going to be used to achieve 
       victory in South Vietnam for the forces opposing communism then it is much 
       more difficult to get ab abswer, The United States Congress has just 
       voted an additional 125,000,000 dollars special aid to South Vietnam 
       because of the seriousness of the situation in this country. This can be 
       taken as a token of the United States determination but, again, it doesn't 
       solve the question as to how victory for the anti-communist forces will be 
       achieved.

                    Let me try and put this particular war, because it is a war, 
       into perspective. World conditions between the Nato powers, that is the 
       free European powers - Canada and the United States, and the communist 
       countries on the other side of the Iron Curtain have been stabilised in
       recent months.   The reason for this is clear. The communist countries 
       and principally Russia know full well that the United States, Great Britain 
       and their Allies are prepared to lay everything on the line if there is a 
       communist attack on West Berlih or on Western Europe. This has been made
411    plain in more than one Berlin crisis since the end of the last war. Crises 
       which were instigated by the Russians but which were answered firmly and 
       vehemently by the West.

                    Now, let me come to another kind of threat. The Russians 
       tried nuclear blackmail over Cuba and they were met by the full force of 
       the American response. President Kennedy made it quite plain that if 
       the Russians persisted in establishing nuclear missiles in Cuba the 
       United States would respond with all the force at its command. As a 
       result, the Russians withdrew their missiles. Again the Russians - 
       the communists - learnt that over this kind of threat the West would be 
       prepared to lay everything on the line and thus the threat receded..

                    And now we come to a third kind of threat, a threat which is 
       cheap to initiate by the communist countries but to which any reply by the
       West is difficult and expensive. This was the threat of subversion, of 
       sending in guerillas, of training them, of arming them, to terrorise the 
       countryside and undermine the Government of the country. This is what is
       happening in South Vietnam. There is no doubt that the guerillas, the 
       terrorists, have been directed and supplied and inspired from North Vietnam, 
       from Communist Vietnam backed by Communist China.

                    It is difficult to fight this kind of war. The terrorists, 
       the Communists, in Vietnam look like other Vietnamese. They are people 
       of the same race even if they come from the northern part of the country.

                                                                        /2

                                       .. 2 -



       They cause some trouble in a town or a village, they ambush a patrol, then 
       they go to their hideouts in the jungle. They liow away their weapons 
       and they look like any other Vietnamese. It is difficult, if not impossible 
       to respond to this kind of attack by conventional military means. You 
       haven't got a conventional target to hit. A small number of people, 
       lightly armed and capable of moving quickly from one part of a country to 
       another can cause a great deal of havoc, they can cause terror amongst the 
       countryside and they can make it extremely difficult to keep law and order.


                    It is generally thought that you need about twenty regular 
       troops to respond to one guerilla or one well trained terrorists of this 
       kind. Thus, if you have a thousand guerillas you need twenty thousand 
       regular troops.


                    It is easy to see why this kind of war is inexpensive for 
       the sponsors, for the people of North Vietnam or in Communist China and 
       extremely expensive for South Vietnam and for the West. Somehow or other, 
       and I don't pretend to suggest how this can be done, this kind of subversion 
       has got to be made expensive for the people who sponsor it. Until the West 
       faces up to this particular problem I believe it will be faced by continuing 
       subversion in one country or another throughout the world.


                    South-East Asia i3 a testing ground about this matter at the
       present time.  If the communist terrorists are successful in South Vietnam
       this would gravely affect SEATO and the countries that belong to it The 
       other countries would come to believe that the Chinese, the Chinese 
       communists were going to win. Cambodia, Burma, Thailand and Pakistan, 
      already with the closest relations to Peking might become more closely 
      allied to Peking than they now are.


                    But this wouldn't be the end of the story. If this kind of 
      subversion is allowed to be successful in South Vietnam it will not only 
      spread to other countries in South-East Asia but it will spread to Africa 
      and to South America - fertile grounds for this kind of attack. There 
      comes times when free countries find their backs up against a brick wall, 
      they cannot retreat further without giving away vital interests. It is 
      my belief that once such vital interest is found in South Vietnam in South- 
      East Asia the ‚epercussions of defeat will resound around the world, the 
      prestige of the free countries would be threatened gravely. Many people
ï     would come to say that the United States, the greatest and the strongest free
      country in the world, had laid her prestige on the line and lost.  Thus, 
      if other countries allied to her in some way are threatened in the same 
      manner they too can be won over to communism. The West, and the United 
      States in particular, cannot allow this to happen. The world wide 
      implications of what is happening in South Vietnam are well recognised in 
      this Capital of the United States of America.


                   The means and the manner whereby the threat can be answered and
      resolved are not clear.  I would, however, believe there is a general under- 
      standing that the methods that have been used for the last year or two are 
      not sufficient because the position has been deteriorating in South Vietnam,
      and unless new tactics are used the position cannot be held indefinitely.


                   There is no need to underline the seriousness of ultimate
      failure.  It wouldn't only affect our close friend and ally Malaysia - 
      a Commonwealth country - the affect would come upon us in one form or 
      another.


                   This. coming week I will be visiting Ottawa. Canada has 
      always shown a very close interest in South East Asia and is one of the
     fourteen members of the Laos controlled commission established several years
     ago.   It would be interesting to see how the Canadian authorities look upon
     these problems.




                                       -0 00

