<!--start metadata-->
Title: French nuclear testing in the Pacific, national health scheme
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 2/07/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  BROADCAST:          3HA Sunday, 2 July, 1972 
                      3YB Thursday, 6 July, 1972 
                      3LK Tuesday, 4 July, 1972

     When I was visiting Warrnambool High School a few days ago, 
  a group of students handed me a petition signed by several hundred 

  people protesting against the French nuclear tests in the Pacific.

     It is often said that young people these days are more aware 

  of current issues than their parents and grandparents were at their 

  age. The action of those Warrnambool students demonstrated more 

  than just an awareness of issues. It showed a deep concern which 

  is born of that awareness, a concern which I applaud.

•    Let me come to the particular matter with which they were 
  concerned. There seems to be a misconception that the Australian 

  Government has been slow to react to the French tests, as if we had 

  only just discovered they were being held.
     In fact, we have been active in protesting against this kind 

  of occurrence for a decade. As far back as 1963, a treaty for a 

  partial ban on nuclear tests banned tests in the atmosphere, in 

  outer space and under water. We took our stand against nuclear 

  tests when we ratified that treaty.

     Coming to the present time, let me make it quite clear that the 
• Commonwealth Government wanted the current series of tests abandoned 

  and we made the first protest this year to France on March 29. 

  That's right. We were the first country this year to protest against 

  the current French tests in the Pacific. The trouble is that it is 

  only recently that the whole affair has become a public issue.

     Then as recently as last month, the New Zealand Prime Minister, 

  Mr. Marshall, and our Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, sent a joint 

  message to the conference of the committee on disarmament in Geneva 

  protesting at the French tests. In the course of that message, 

  they said France had taken the decision to proceed with such tests




                              .../2

                                        2.

      contrary to the appeals made to it by many Pacific countries, 
      contrary to the urging of the General Assembly of the United Nations, 
      and contrary to the recent call by the Stockholm Conference which 
      has especially condemned those tests carried out in the atmosphere.
           I quote from the message of the Australian and New Zealand
      Prime Ministers:
            "The Australian and New Zealand Governments, reflecting the 
      grave concern felt throughout their communities and conscious that 
      the problem of atmospheric testing in their region is part only of a
•     broader problem; recalling their support at the UN General Assembly 
      November1971 for resolution 2828 (c) which stressed the urgency of 
      bringing to a halt all nuclear weapon testing in all environments 
      by all States; call jointly on the conference of the Committee on 
      Disarmament to continue to accord high priority to the question of 
      the urgent need for the suspension of such tests and the
      formulation of a comprehensive test ban treaty." That's the end of 
      the quote.
           Having said all that and to allay unnecessary fears, I should
      say that Australia has a network of observer stations providing
•     information on radio active fall-out for the Atomic Weapons Test 
      Committee. All the information shows that there is no harmful 
      effect on the Australian population. I don't say this in any way 
      to weaken the Australian Government's objections to the tests, but 
      to counter any unreasonable concern people might have about the 
      tests from press reports.

           Let me say a word about health. The present national health
      scheme has been evolved by the Commonwealth to suit Australian 
      conditions and is based on many years of practical experience. It
      is not an impersonal, nationalised arrangement, like the so-called.../3

                 3•

   "free" schemes in some other countries in which the patient can 
   so easily be lost in the machine.
     Consider the advantages. Our scheme is voluntary — you don't 
   have to join it. You can choose any doctor, or change to any 
   doctor if you want to, and women know how vital this freedom of 
   choice can be.
     The amount of the doctor's bill you have to pay, whether for 
   surgery or home visits, is limited. Where doctors participate 
   under the common fee plan, your cost is 80 cents for a surgery
.  visit and $1.20 for a home visit. The doctor, too, has freedom. 
   He is not compelled to accept a quota of patients under a salaried 
   or nationalised health scheme, and he can fix his own fee, although 
   with notable exceptions, especially with some sections in New South 
   Wales, the medical profession does cooperate.
     The Commonwealth has ensured that medical and hospital 
   insurance is not an unreasonable burden on low income earners. 
   Families whose incomes are below $51.50 a week have all their 
   contributions to medical and hospital funds paid for. For those 
   with family incomes below $54.50, the Commonwealth pays two thirds 
   of the contributions, and one third for those with a family income 
   below $57.50.
     There's also a $5 limit on operations where the common fee 
   applies.
     The overriding truth is that the Commonwealth's scheme is 
   working and working well. It is constantly being examined and 
   improved for the benefit of the Australian people. So I urge you 
   to think carefully about the matter before you give unthinking 
   support to something labelled "free health" but which in reality 
   could turn out to be a very expensive experiment in nationalised

                               .../4

                                  4.


     medicine without real benefit to you. We want a scheme that works 
     and doesn't cost the earth, because, as you know, in the end it is 
     always the taxpayer who pays the bill.

                                000000000000


      For further information: Collin Myers
                               Tel. Canberra 73 3261








•

