<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence policy
Description: press statement
Date: 8/05/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PKESS STATEMEfiT:                   May 8th,1960
MAL(:G.L* FRASr.I'iDI4FEUCL POLICY 
       Last week I spoke about changoe that are being made in our
Defence Forces. I thought it may be worth while giving some background
information which may help to fill in the general picture on Defence policy.
Defence planning is always extremely difficult because you are trying to
build up an answer to something that might happen at some time in the future.
If war does not happen, it could be argued and has been argued by some,
that what has been spent on Defence planning has been wasted. On the
other hand, it could be more truly argued that if war does not occur
then peace has been maintained because of the defence effort which peace—
loving countries have been prepared to put forward.
       The nature of defence planning is based firstly on what the
Chiefs of Staff and our advisers from overseas believe to be the possible
or likely outbreaks of war in our particular area, that is in South East
Asia. Ten or twelve years ago, the best strategic advice seemed to be
that a global war was more possible than a limited war. Vow it is thought
because of the nuclear dett`errent a limited or local war is much more
likely than a global war. This does not mean that anyone thinks that
war is particularly likely, but war is always a possibility especially
when there are Dictators of any kind in charge of powerful countries,
and our Chiefs of staff must try to assess the kind of danger that could
arise to threaten our security.
       To try and prevent local wars breaking out, the Democracies of
South East Asia have been building up strong forces which can be used
quickly and with effect. It is thought that a relatively small force
which is available quickly may well, in this kind of strategic concept,
be much more useful than a larger force which will take a much longer
time to get into action. If a small war breaks out on the boundary of
one country, a small but well equipped force which can quickly attack
the aggressor may well be much more effective than a large force that
cannot be got into action, perhaps until after the aggressor has won his
immediate objectives.
       The second thing which can never be left out of any defence
consideration is the mount of money that a country can afford to spend
on defence. For some time, Australia has been spending £200 million a
year, and I think we should probably regard this as pretty cheap

f                                         2
      insurance for the future security of this country.         +e spend much
      less per head than the United Kingdom, the United states or Canada. 
      However, it is not possible for us to spend more than this at the 
      present time because of the heavy demands on Australian capital 
      for developmental schemes, such as the Snowy Mountains =storks send
      other capital works that are being undertaken, either by Federal or 
      State Governments or by private people. Our rapid rate of development 
      absorbe large sums of money which means that the proportion we might 
      be able to spend on defence is not so great as in more developed and 
      mature countries.
                  I think every country realises, whether it be a large or 
      small country that it cannot be secure by itself. We all need powerful 
      friends. It is important for the efficiency of our mutual security 
      that the Defence forces of one country can be reasonably easily 
      integrated with those of its Allies in time of emergency, and for 
      this reason the Australian forces have been standardising on the
      latest types of American equipment in recent years, because our 
      geographical position alone, makes it much more likely that we would 
      be fighting with Americans by our side than anyone else.
                  The other thing that needs to be remembered is that modern 
      defence equipment is extremely expensive and it is therefore very 
      difficult for a small country like Australia to be up-to-date all the 
      time. The United States can afford to change her front line Fighters 
      perhaps every two or three years. Australia must make the front line 
      Fighter last much longer than that and, therefore, there will be a time 
      when the Fighter possessed by this country will not be the best avail- 
      able in the World. The same thing applies to military equipment of all 
      kinds. When the Army equips itself with a gun like the 105mm Howitzer, 
      it knows that this eqi pment will have to serve the Array for a consider- 
      able time to come. Because equipment must last longer it is much more 
      important that a small country with limited resources makes the
      right decision when it is ordering new equipment. This sometimes 
      leads to delays. This sort of thing can happen. You may have 
      reached a decision to develop and to build a new front line fighter. 
      You think you know the sort of Fighter you want and one appears to be

                 3
 available that will serve your needs well. But then, just over the 
 horizon, you see another Fighter coming off the production line which 
 is going to be better, faster and more efficient and, posuibl;f cheaper. 
 Do you take the Fighter that is available now or do you wait longer 
 and take the one that will be available in 12 or 18 months' time.
      This is the sort of question that our technical advisers 
 and the Government must continually decide and the decisions are not 
always easy.
      There is one other thing I want to say especially to those 
who might question the need for our Defence Forces. The Democraciee 
and freedom—loving countries have always been forced into war when 
they were weak and ill—prepared and when a potential agressor has 
thoughts "Now is the time when we can get what we want and achieve 
our aims before they are armed." This was certainly the circumstance 
which made the last Great War an extremely difficult one for the 
first two or three yearu. I think every freedom loving country is 
determined that this sort of happening will not occur again and that 
we will maintain our security and independence because of our strength 
and ability and willingness to defend ourselves.

