<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence effort and Indonesia
Description: press statement
Date: 18/11/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  PRESS STATEMENT:


  NALCOLì'li FRASER:



                                                       November 18th,1962



                        DEFENCE Ebr ORT AND INDONESIA



                The debate on the Defence Estimates this year was quite different
  from previous debates.   In earlier years, the Opposition had always said that 
  we are spending too much money on defence and that Defence establishments should 
  be reduced in all directions. This year, the Opposition confined itself more 
  to a criticism of the Australian forces and the Government effort without saying 
  that those Forces are too great for present needs.


                The Government values very greatly respor.=ible criticism of the 
  Defence effort which is made by such bodies as the R.S.L. and other interested 
  people throughout the Community. This criticism and advice is always well 
  considered.


               The Government, however, makes its final decision on how much 
 money is to be spent on each of the Services, in the light of the strategic 
  inteligence assessment of the threat to Australia. This is based on our own 
  Intelligence reports, on our knowledge of what is going on in other countries 
 and, in particular, it is based on the most valuable knowledge and co-operation
 that we get from our Allies.    It is not always realised how closely defence 
 planning is integrated with countries like the United States through SEATO and 
 ANZUS, Australia's two defensive treaties. In this planning, other countries 
 also, of course, have their own Intelligence reports, and I understand much of 
 these are available to the Government.


               Australian forces are planned to work in close  co-operation
 during any emergency, especially with United States Forces.    That is why our 
 Forces have been re-equipped with weapons that can use common  lines of supply.

               The strategic assessment in this area has been  and is that a 
 global war, while possible, is unlikely, but that local wars  in South-East Asia
 are quite possible. Indeed, the Indo-China war proves that    this is so.   If 
 one of Australia's SEATO partners is attacked by a Communist  country Australia 
 could be involved, together with the United States and other  countries.
Australia's policy has been to equip her forces to be able to   meet such commit- 
 ments quickly. The small, well-armed force that is quickly    on the spot could, 
 in some instances, be more valuable than a larger force that  takes much longer
 to get into the field.


               Recently, some people have put the view that Australia was let 
 down over West New Guinea and that, therefore, we need larger defence forces
now.    I'd like to examine this proposition for a few moments. It is then 
argued that because we were let down over West New Guinea we cannot rely on our
Allies if East New Guinea were attacked.     A grave error lies in this belief. 
We were not let down over West New Guinea to start with. For a long time we 
had realised that the Indonesians were likely to gain possession of West New
Guinea.


               I have said before that while it is possible that there is an 
Imperialist movement in Indonesia, I do not really believe there is. West New 
Guinea was part of the old Dutch Empire. The Indonesians, who had to fight 
for their freedom against the Dutch, always regarded themselves as heirs to the 
whole Dutch Empire. At the last moment when the agreements were being signed, 
West New Guinea was excluded. This is going back to 1949.


               There is a lot of emotion in the Indonesian attitude and some 
logic. At least, as near neighbours, we should take the trouble to try and 
understand their point of view. Because they did understand the Indonesian 
point of view. Because they did understand the Indonesian point of view, 
the great Powers - the United States in particular, had no particular brief for 
the Dutch in West New Guinea and recognised that a cancer would be ever

                                                                         /2.

                                   2



present in this part of the world, capable of stirring up a local war, unless 
the Indonesians gained possession of West New Guinea.

             Now the argument runs because the United States did not fight to 
keep the Indonesians out of West New Guinea they won't fight to keep them out 
of West New Guinea, and therefore Australia is in grave danger. There is no 
comparison whatsoever between East and West New Guinea. We are tied by the 
ANZUS Treaty to the United States, .?d an attack on East New Guinea would be 
equivalent to an attack on Australia in the terms of that Treaty, The United 
States would not break her Treaty obligations, and it is nonsense to talk as
though she would.   However, the people who have the belief about which I am 
talking go on to argue that since we cannot rely on help in East New Guinea 
we therefore have got toreatly expand our defence effort very quickly. This 
would be foolish for two reasons. Firstly, because I have said the situations 
are not the same. They are quite different between East and West New Çuinea 
and secondly, if we began a vast increase in our defence program at this period 
of time it would be considered in Indonesia as being directed against Indonesia. 
While there is still much goodwill in Indonesia for Australia, it would be more 
than foolish to indicate to Indonesia that we regard their country as our No.l. 
potential enemy. We are both in this part of the world, and we will both stay 
here. We are near neighbours and we have got to get on together. Governments
should not do anything which would make it more diffic for our two countries 
to get on.

             This, of course,does not mean to say that conditions cannot change. 
In the 19th century British leaders looked upon France as the great enemy. 
Within a matter of 5 years France became an ally r,nd Germany the enemy.
Germany was the enemy till 1945. Now Britain is allied to Germany and Russia 
is the enemy. Attitudes and alliances change and conditions can change. We 
have to be ready for them and be prepared to adapt ourselves if they do. But 
there is little point in hastening these changes, especially if they are ones 
that may be founded on suspicions which can, quite often, be ill--founded.

