<!--start metadata-->
Title: Establishment of college west of Ballarat
Description: radio talk
Date: 17/09/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     It is important to have a well—developed advanced 
 college west of Ballarat. At the moment the only one west of 
 Ballarat is Warrnambool, and with the population of Warrnambool 
 and'the wealth of the surrounding area this is the college to 
 develop.
     As a local member I will certainly do everything I can 
 to see that the Warrnambool Technical College is developed 
 over a period of time as a sound college of advanced education.
     However as Commonwealth Minister for Education and 
 Science I must work within the rules, and the rules are -
     . that the Victorian Government puts proposals
       to the Commonwealth.

       that I am advised on these proposals by the 
       Commonwealth Advisory Committee on Advanced 
       Education.
       that assistance to Warrnambool be fitted into a 
       triennial program for colleges throughout 
       Australia.
     It is for this reason and because the question of Warrnambool's
' affiliation was being actively discussed I earlier asked'Dr. Wark
 and other members of his committee to visit Warrnambool .
     I think I can reasonably say the Commonwealth's advisers
 were impressed by the potential of the area, and by the unanimity
 by which the district accepted Warrnambool as the centre for this
 development.
     They made no commitment to me on what their advice
 might ultimately be, as this would depend on the nature of the
 proposal that comes either directly from the State or,
 alternatively as one would normally expect, from the State after
 it had received recommendations from the Victoria Institute of
 Colleges, which is the body the State has developed to advise it
 on the development in these colleges.
     There has been a battle for affiliation. The arguments
 seem to be these —
     On the one hand there are many people whose views are
 soundly based, who say that they cannot expect this college to
 be properly developed until the citizens of Warrnambool, the
 teachers and students all know it is going to have the appropriate
 backing from the Victoria Institute of Colleges and from the

~



            —2—


 governments themselves.
     And for some reason there are those who argue that the
 people of Warrnambool, teachers and students must on the other hand
 advance their own cause before they achieve affiliation. To
 those who have this view I would say: how can the people inter-
 ested in the college advance the cause of the college unless
 they know the appropriate government financial support is going
 to be forthcoming.
     I can only repeat that I have been watching this with
 the greatest interest, and that as a local member I will do every-
 thing I can to support it.

