<!--start metadata-->
Title: Conservation
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 18/06/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


      BROADCAST:                             3HA Sunday, 18 June, 1972. 
                                             3YB Thursday, 22 June, 1972. 
                                             3LK Tuesday, 20 June, 1972.

            There are now few people who are not concerned about our
      environment, about the quality of life issue.  The Australian 
      Conservation Foundation has done much to create this public 
      awareness.
            I believe that people have come to recognise that there is
•     a basic long term threat to our environment in Australia, just 
      as worthy of our attention as in the heavily populated and 
      industrialised nations elsewhere.
            Of course people associated with rural industries in areas
      such as western Victoria have for a long time been well aware 
      of the need for conservation, and farmers for purely commercial 
      reasons, if for no others, have been active conservationists 
      in their own occupation as a matter of course.
            It was pleasing, therefore, to find the recent statement
•     by the Commonwealth Minister for the Environment, Mr. Howson,
      being so well received across the whole spectrum of Australian
      society.  Already Commonwealth and State Ministers concerned 
      with the environment meet regularly for consultation as the
      Australian Environment Council.  The Council will draw up
      standards and guidelines for its own use and it is hoped these 
      will be generally recognised throughout Australia.
            The Council has already begun to study such important 
      environmental problems as waste disposal and non-destructable
      and non-returnable containers and packaging generally. Of 
      course the Commonwealth is actively involved on joint committees

                                                              .../2

                                   2.

      with the States in areas such as health, water resources, 
      shipping and transport, forestry, minerals, agriculture and 
      fisheries.
              In Mr. Howson's statement the Commonwealth announced
      two important initiatives in the environment field. The 
      first involves the introduction of a system of impact 
      statements, that is to say that when a Commonwealth Minister 
      prepares a submission to the Cabinet on any proposal that has 
      some relevance to the environment, that submission must be 
      accompanied by a statement setting out the impact the
      proposal is likely to make on the environment.  It is
      quite certain that the impact statement will become an important 
      element in decision making.
              Even State projects for which Commonwealth financial 
      assistance is sought will also need to be supported by 
      assurances that all environmental factors have been considered 
      and evaluated.
•             Mr. Howson also announced the membership of a special 
      advisory committee to be set up to advise the Commonwealth on
      environmental problems.  This committee will be free to
      suggest to the Minister matters that it feels it could usefully 
      examine.It is clear there is much Governments can do, and in
      Australia are now doing.  But the task of protecting the 
      environment, of combating pollution and practising conservation
      cannot be left entirely to Governments.  The individual can
      do as much as the industrialist with his factories. It is 
      as important to avoid littering the countryside and city streets 
      as it is to prevent the belching of black smoke from industrial
                                                            .../3

                                  3.

      chimneys.   Parents and teachers have as important a role
      in setting an example and instilling in children an awareness 
      and respect for their environment, as company managers and 
      politicians have to help keep it pollution-free. Protecting 
      the environment is a challenge for all of us.
                               000000000000

•     For further information:   Collin Myers
                                 Telephone Canberra 73 3261







•

