<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wheat, oats and barley
Description: press statement
Date: 10/05/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRESS STATEMENT:


       MALCOLM FRAER.!


                                                            May 10th, 1964




                                WHEAT, OATS AND BARLEY




                   A few days ago the Minister for Primary Industry made a 
       comprehensive statement on the import of grains into the United 
       Kingdom.


                    It is not generally realized that although the United
       Kingdom has not been able to join the European Common Market she has, 
       nevertheless, been altering her agricultural support policies to bring 
       them into line with the policies of the Common Market. Up to the present 
       the United Kingdom has allowed her own farmers to produce as much as they 
       want of various products, and they have been given a guaranteed price for
       it.    In addition, large quantities of grains have been able to enter 
       the United Kingdom without any restriction. This would be sold at 
       so-called competitive world prices. The United Kingdom farmer would get 
       a subsidy from the United Kingdom Treasury which would be the difference 
       between his guaranteed price and the price of imported grain.


•                  Under the new system the United Kingdom farmers will still 
       get some price support from the Treasury, but the scheme will be so arranged 
       that unreasonable expansion of United Kingdom production will be dis- 
       couraged. There will be some limitation of entry into the United Kingdom 
       market for traditional suppliers such as Australia, and it is believed that 
       this limitation of entry will maintain a higher market price for imported 
       grains.


                   The full details of the scheme are quite complicated and 
       probably there will be quite a number of English farmers who won't under- 
       stand what is involved. The minimum import price for Australian wheat has,
       for the present, been fixed at £24.10.0. stg. a ton. If there were an 
       attempt to send Australian wheat to Britain at a price lower than this, it 
       would attract a duty or levy to bring it up to this so-called minimum price. 
       This won't operate at the present time because the ruling rate for Australian 
       wheat on the British market is at present £27.7.6 stg, a ton.


                   One of the advantages of traditional suppliers of this minimum 
       import price is that it will prevent dumping of wheat on the British market. 
       There have been times -then the European suppliers have done this and, as a 
       result, the price of wheat imported into the United Kingdom has fallen. 
       Under the new arrangement there would be no advantage in trying to send wheat 
       to the United Kingdom below the minimum import price because it would 
       immediately attract a duty to bring it up to that price. It is hoped that 
       the new arrangements may bring greater stability into the British market.


                   The Australian negotiators made it quite clear that Australian 
       agreement to the new plans would involve continued United Kingdom acceptance 
       of the provision in the present Trade Treaty to purchase 750,000 tons of 
      Australian wheat each year. The United Kingdom has agreed to this.


                   It will not be possible to predict with accuracy how the new 
       scheme will work. Either country has a right to withdraw from the operation 
      of the scheme at 4 months notice. It may well be that in the world wide 
      trade negotiations that are getting under way in the new few months, inter- 
      national arrangements of a mucia"wider scope will replace bilateral agreements 
      of this kind.







                                                                     /2

                                       - 2



                      The important departures so far as Australia is concerned 
        is that the United Kingdom is now abandoning the cheap food policy for 
       her people in which food products could be imported to the United Kingdom
       duty free.    As a result, traditional exporters like Australia have had
       to expect some limitation on the volume they could sell. It would be 
       interesting to know how much of the changed British attitude has been 
       brought about because they think these alterations may make it easier to 
       join tye Common Market at some future date. There is no doubt that 
       British Farm Support Policy is coming year by year to look more like the 
       policy of the European countries across the Channel.






                                 WOOL        LEVY



                      A short while ago the Minister for Primary Industry intro- 
       duced legislation to give effect to the Government's promise to subsidise 
       wool promotion. The Government has done this because of the over-riding 
       importance of wool to Australia and because it believed that it was
       necessary for considerable funds to be spent on wool promotion throughout 
       the world to combat the synthetic challenge to wool.
•
                      It is now widely known that the program that has been out- 
       lined by the International Wool Secretariat has received support from the 
       three member countries.- Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.

                      Last year the Australian Wool Board asked the Growers, 
       through the Australian Wool Industry Conference, to meet Australia's 
       share of the costs4 Because the additional levy was so much more than 
       the then existing levy the Wool Conference approached the Government for 
       assistance. The Prime Minister announced a decision to provide for a 
       period of. 3 years commencing July 1st, 1964 that the Government should 
       match £ for £ funds contributed by growers for promotion in excess of the 
       present comtribution of 10/- a bale. At the end of three years Government 
       assistance will be reviewed.

                      Last January the Australian Wool Industry Conference, by 
       a majority of 40 to 10, decided that wool growers should pay a levy for 
       promotion which, taken with the Government contribution, would provide
       about £11,000,000 per year.  It is expected that the Government's 
411    contribution will be between four and five million. It must be
       remembered that the Government also provides £2. for every £l. paid by 
       grr.>vers for research, and this will be continued.

                      One substantial change has been made in the method of 
       collecting funds from woolgrowers. At the request of the Conference 
       the levy will be raised as a percentage of the value of a person's wool 
       clip rather than so much a bale. For some time it has been felt that 
       the flat rate levy of so much a bale unfairly penalised the grower of 
       lower grade wools. The percentage system should work more fairly.

                      The Bills introduced in Parliament provide for a maximum 
       rate of levy of 2%. The actual rate which will be imposed for any one 
       year will be f ized by regulation on the recommendation of the Australian 
       Wool Industry Conference.

