<!--start metadata-->
Title: Waterfront legislation
Description: press statement
Date: 3/10/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT :

NA.LCOLN FRASER :

                                                    October 3rd,1965


                          WATERFRONT LEGISLATION

            Last week the Government introduced legislation to curb the 
 influence and power of the Waterside Workers' Federation. This has be- 
 come necessary because of the Communist influence in the Federation, and 
 because of the industrial disturbances on the waterfront which have led 
to a slower and slower turn-round of ships with higher freight costs for 
both importers and exporters in Australia.

            Control of the waterfront has given the communists a strangle-
hold on Australian exports and on Australian imports. It gives them a 
power which they should not have in a democratic country such as Australia. 
It is not generally realised that over the years, through its industrial 
power, the Federation has built up a position of strength and special 
privileges which have not been equalled by any other Union. It had always 
been hoped that such privileges would lead to industrial peace on the water- 
front. This has proved an illusion.

            Recently, members of the Government Parties questioned some 
members of the Waterside Workers' Federation and we were told quite 
categorically that, even if all the industrial demands of the Union were 
met, there would still be strikes for political reasons - because of
apartheid in South Africa, because of our policy in South East Asia or 
perhaps in support of the political objective of nationalization of the 
industry. The representatives to whom we were speaking could not
distinguish between industrial action designed to achieve decent conditions 
for their members and industrial action which had no connection at all with 
their working conditions but which were related entirely to political ends.

            Let me try and describe briefly what has happened on the water- 
front in terms of performance.

            Over the last ten years the average net gang rates of work per 
hour for general overseas loading have fallen by nearly 3 tons per hour in 
Melbourne or by about 20%. The loading of wool averseas has fallen by 
more than three tons an hour in Sydney or by more than 20%. Where loading 
rates have increased it has been as a consequence of mechanisation, but 
when this happens it is found that those cargoes which still have to be 
handled by hand are loaded more slowly. Over the last ten years industrial 
disputes on the waterfront accounted for 21% of total time lost by all 
workers in all industries, even though the waterfront represents less than 
1% of all workers throughout all industries. Putting this another way, on 
an average for all industries, two hours per man were lost because of 
industrial disputes in this period. The average on the waterfront was 
fiftyfive hours a man and I have already said that many of these stoppages 
have not been related in any sense to industrial conditions but to political 
objectives of the Communist dominated Waterside Workers' Federation.

            In recent times, the Waterside Workers' Federation has begun 
strikes without the support of the Australian Trade Council or Trade Unions, 
and it has in many senses lost the sympathy of large sections of the Trade 
Union movement. The recent warning by Mr. Nonk, the President of the 
A.C.T.U., concerning communist influence in Unions may be read in this context.

           The Bill is going to remove from the Waterside Workers' Federation 
the statutory authority which they have possessed since 1947 which gave the 
Federation a monopoly of recruitment. In future, waterside workers will be 
recruited through the Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority and not 
through the Union.



                                                                  /2

                                  2  ANN



              In recent times the Union has not kept Port vetas in the 
major cities up to their full level even though many people have applied 
for what is a well paid job. Early last year, for example, when an 
additional 600 men were wanted to work in Sydney over 14,000 applications 
for work on the waterfront were distributed by the Federation and it 
should be noted that this was at a time when many industries were finding 
it difficult to get labour.

              The Minister point6d:oút thdttthax rpenplé nominâted. fors:
work on the ' wraterf ont by the - Federatiofhad criminal records,.   • 
By criminal records, the Minister pointed out, he meant assault by 
violence, larceny and receiving. In many instances, nearly a quarter of 
those people submitted by the Union had convictions of this kind. The 
Minister said - "This cannot be a coincidence. It is just not true that 
one quarter of our citizens have a criminal record."

              It has also been said that men previously de-registered 
because of misconduct on the waterfront have been re-nominated by the Union 
under false names. This provides the background to the decision to remove 
from the Union their special rights and privileges which gave them monopoly 
over recruitment of waterfront labour.

              The Bill does not only direct its attention to the Union, it 
also directs its attention to see that employers must ensure that their 
stevedoring operations are, at all times, properly supervised and the 
penalty for not doing this, and this is a penalty on the employers, will 
be increased to range from £250 to £2,500.

              The Bill will also make it possible to de-register the 
Waterside Workers' Federation under circumstances which cause severe 
disruption to the industry. Registration of any Union gives that Union 
certain rights and privileges. The Waterside Workers' Federation has 
abused these rights, it has abused its power, it has abused its privileges, 
in a manner which is so detrimental to the Australian public at large that 
it has been felt necessary to deal firmly with the matter. Before 
de-registration, which would lead to the loss of the Union's rights under 
the Stevedoring Industry Act, could take place, a properly constituted 
tribunal would have to find that circumstances warranted these drastic 
steps. Even if a tribunal made such a finding, de-registration of the 
Union would not be automatic, it would be made by the Governor-General 
in Council within six months of the declaration.

              The effect of such dc-registration would be basically to 
outlaw the Federation but it would not affect wages and conditions as they 
apply to individual waterside workers.

              It should not be thcaght that anyone is being unnecessarily 
tough on the Waterside Workers' Federation because as transport costs and 
shipping costs are increased as a result of their activities, everyone in 
Australia suffers. This is as a result of the communist-dominated leader-
ship.   I am sure the great bulk of Federation members, especially in the 
smaller ports, recognise the improvement that has been made in wages and 
conditions. Their wages have been increased dramatically in recent years. 
For example, while a metal trades employee has had his margin increased by 
400%, the watersider's margin has increased by 1200%. While average 
weekly earnings in industry have increased from £9.5.0. to 26.1.0. for a 
40 hour week, plus overtime, the weekly earnings from watersiders has 
risen from £10.14.8. to £27.14.5. and this is for a 33 or 34 hour week. 
The waterside worker has been treated well in comparison with other 
industries. Evidence of this is borne out by the numbers who apply to 
the Federation when there is any move for recruitment.

                                                                  /3

                  3



       This legislation will only be one branch of the Government's 
attack on the waterfront problems. The enquiry into the waterfront is still 
continuing and I hope one of its major findings will be to devolve ways and 
means by which the Commonwealth can oo-operate with the States to help 
modernise and improve wharf facilities.

       The Government's move is a bold one to help deal with an aspect 
of our economy that puts up costs in every industry in Australia, at the same 
time it represents a courageous move to break the Communist political power 
on the waterfront, a political power that is not used to Australia's advantage.





                  000

