<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 4/03/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                       March 4th, 1962


             Last week, the new Parliament assembled. It is a different 
Parliament from the old one. The numbers are evenly divided and the 
debates should have more life than in the previous Parliament. Up to the 
present time, the Opposition has been quiet and there have been relatively 
no incidents. Late one night on the adjournment, the Opposition did muster 
its full strength and tested the Government's vote but the Government's 
majority of one was unimpaired.

             The first week was largely taken up with the Address-in-Reply 
and with the introduction of Bills which would cover budgetary matters 
which the Government has recently announced and about which I spoke last 
week.

WOOL COMMIT'ihE OF ENQUIRY REPORT:

             Some interesting matters were discussed at Question time. 
The Minister for Primary Industry made it known, in reply to a question I 
asked, that he at last has the Report of the Wool Marketing Committee of 
Inquiry. Senior Ministers have a copy of the Report. I would expect it 
to be released to the industry organizations very shortly. The Victorian 
Wheat and Woolgrowers' Association in particular wanted to have a copy of 
this Report in its hands before the proposed meeting between the Australian 
Wool and Wheat Growers' Federation and the Australian Woolgrowers and 
Graziers' Council at which it is intended to discuss the levy for wool 
promotion. This will be in conformity with arrangements made last year. 
At that time, an interim arrangement was made to increase the promotion 
levy for wool for one year. At that time, an agreement was made that the 
matter would be discussed again after the results of the Committee's inquiry 
had been made known.

             I have not yet seen the Report but, like many other woolgrowers, 
I will be looking forward to reading it most eagerly,.

RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES:


             I asked Sir Garfield Barwick regarding restrictive trade 
practices. When I did this I had in mind, of course, the boycott that
was enforced upon the Portland wool sales,.   Sir Garfield told me that he 
would be making a statement during this Autumn session of Parliament. He 
also said that he was taking the latest Portland events into account in 
formulating his proposals. I discussed the matter later with him in private
conversation.    It is my understanding that there will be a section about 
boycott in the proposals and this is, of course, what the Portland supporters
are interested in.   However, Section 92 of the Constitution may be found to 
limit Commonwealth power in regard to boycott to interstate trade. If this 
is so, State legislation will be required to make the laws effective for
intrastate trade.   This difficulty with the Constitution is one of the 
things that has slowed down Sir Garfield in his proposals, because again, as 
I understand it, when he makes this announcement he wants to be able to say 
that a majority of the States will be passing the necessary complementary 
legislation. The Atdornies of the different States have been kepi fully 
informed of the investigations and there have been repeated discussions 
between the States and the Commonwealth. I sincerely hope therefore that
Victoria will be one of the States that will legislate.   I also told Sir 
Garfield that if I thought there was any amendment that would make his 
legislation stronger or more effective having regard to what happened at
Portland, I would have no qualms about moving such an amendment.. However, 
it is too early to judge this matter at the moment. We don't know yet the 
proposals in detail and won't until the Attorney-General makes a statement.


                                                            i2

                                   2

 DAIRY INDUSTRY:

               I also asked the Minister for Primary Industry a question 
 relating to the future stability of the dairy industry. The dairy industry 
 leaders have this week been in Canberra discussing future stabilisation plans
 with the Minister.    The proposals put forward by the industry leaders will
 be taken by the Minister to Cabinet. The Government has, of course, already 
 announced its intention to legislate for a further 5 yearsT stabilisation plan. 
 This will be essential to continued stability inside the industry.

               There is one request which the industry leaders are putting
 forward and which will be of great interest,  The industry is now asking 
 that the processors of dried milk products, such as Nestles near Warrnambool 
 and Glaxo at Port Fairy, should be included in the stabilisation arrangements. 
 Many years ago, dried milk processors were inside the stabilisation plan but 
 there came a time when the overseas market for their product was much more 
 profitable than the local market and at this time dried milk processors withdrew
from stabilisation.    However, in recent years, the overseas markets have 
 turned sour and the dried milk processors are now looking for assistance. 
They wish to get back inside stabilisation; It is, perhaps, a pity that they 
ever left because when they did leave they left of their own accord.

              However, a strong case can be made out to include the dried 
milk processors inside the new stabilisation agreement,and since the dairy 
industry organizations are asking that they should be so included I am very 
sure that the Government will give this the utmost consideration.



UNITED NATIONS BANKRUPT?

              An interesting question was asked on Thursday by Dudley Erwin 
of Ballarat. He asked the Minister for External Affairs to explain why it 
was necessary for the United Nations to make a bond issue of two hundred
million dollars.   Australia has subscribed to four million dollars of this
loan.   We have done this because we believe in the United Nations, not 
because we think it is a perfect instrument to ensure world peace but
because we believe that it is a forum in which nations may learn to get 
together , and because we believe and hope that, through time, the machinery 
of the United Nations will be improved and that it will become more effective 
in the maintenance of world peace.

              The United Nations itself subscribed to one-half of the two
hundred million loan.  The reason for the loan is clear. The United 
Nations was going bankrupt and unless this loan had been made and unless it 
had been filled by countries believing in the United Nations, the United 
Nations itself might have ceased its operations. You would quite rightly 
want to know why is the United Nations going bankrupt and the answer is very
plain.   The United Nations is meant to be kept in operation by the subscriptions 
of all the member countries, subscriptions which are based on the size of the 
country, the wealth of the country and the number of people in that country. 
The Soviet bloc countries have, for several years, resolutely refused to meet 
their full subscriptions. The United States has, from time to time, made 
grants and has, of its own volition, underwritten the activities of the United 
Nations so that its essential services could be maintained. These grants 
had been made in addition to her normal subscription. However, with the 
continued refusal of Soviet bloc countries to meet their due payments other 
measures were necessary and therefore we have the loan which has recently
been announced.  The loan has been filled and will enable the United Nations
to continue in operation. If countries believe in the future of the United 
Nations they should at least be prepared to meet their share of the cost of 
this organization. While the Communist countries have used it continually for 
political purposes they have not shown their belief in it as an instrument of 
world peace because they have not met their share of the expenses, a share to 
which they originally agreed when they all signed the charter of the United
Nations.

