<!--start metadata-->
Title: The problems of disarmament
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 23/06/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  vwyr„c r v . ..;.. •na_.~.,. _r ..~,.

                                                                                          3HA - 23/6/57 
  enforced and which maintained en est                                                    3YB - 26/6/57
                                     TUE PROBLEMS OF DISARMAMENT

                        By: Muloolm Fraser, Memba for Wannon.



                Over the last few months we have seen and heard a great deal of 


 propaganda and talk about the problems of disarmament. This includes 


 the question of the atom bomb and nuclear weapons.


                Let me make one thing from the outset quite clear. I would be 


 the happiest person in the world and so, I am sure, would every politician 


 from every Party if the atom and hydrogen bombs could be forgotten and 


 if we could get genuine agreement on disarmament between the great powers. 


 But to disarm ourselves while a potential foe continues to arm and to 


 experiment with these horrible new weapons would be nothing; more than to 


 commit st*ide.


               Let us look at the facts of the present situation regarding 


modern weapons and disarmament. Since the war, the free democracies 


have been protected almost entirely by their superior technical knowledge 


and by their possession of the great deterrent, the atom and hydrogen 


bomb, Our freedom and our strength lies in this deterrent. '' thout 


it, Communist superiority in numbers and the iron control which they 


exert over tLeir cceno q ev n in times of peace - a control which is 


enforced and which maintained an extraordinarily high war effort - would 


have given them a superiority in conventional methods of fighting which 


we would have found it extremely hard to combat.


               We have had the deterrent which our greatest statesmen believe 


has been the one thing that has preserved our freedom. We must remember 


that it is the democracies possession of the atom bomb that has prevented 


the Communists over-running Western Europe during the last l years 


in the sass way as they recently over-ran unhappy Hungary. We cannot 


allow the Communist powers to become technically superior to ourselves 


in nuclear weapons, because than to their superiority in numbers would 


be added a superiority in modern weespons leaving us extraordinarily 


vulnerable.


                Taking into accoüht these facts and remembering Russia's 


superiority in manpower we must, if we wish to survive, unfortunately 


reject the view that we can forsake tests of nuclear weapons alone 


while the Russians continue with their own tests.

 r       If the problems of disarmament and of mutual inspecttion eau be
 solved then the story would be a different one but this again involves 

 immense difficulties. We must hope and pray that they will be overcome.

         It is not sufficient for the great powers to be disarmed so far 

 as nuclear weapons are concerned because they would immediately give the 

 Russians - a potential enemy - superiority in aay conventional weapons 

 because of greater manpower and because her materiel resources are geared 

 to a war effort which, in peace time, is entirely unacceptable to a free 

 democracy.

         The disarmament problem is one problem end must be treated 

 as one problem whether we are talking of atom bombe or whether we are 

 talking of the weapons that we saw used during the last war.

         The people of the world should hope and pray that agreement 

 can be reached on these great problems. We should hope for sufficient

 trust and understanding and good faith to be generated to free the world 
   the fear of
from/its own destruction by the use of weapons which have become almost 

 impossible to describe.

        We find ourselves in this dilemma - the dilemma of developing 

and increasing our knowledge of weapons which could spell the destruction 

of civilisation as we know it - for the simple and unhappy reason that 

our scientific knowledge has gone far beyond the bounds of our social 

knowledge and of our capacity to live together.

        Science hue taught us how to destroy each other. The great 

nations of the world must learn how to live together so that civilisa- 

tion will not be destroyed. The hard truth of this is that it can only 

be possible if the Communists give up their imperialism -- if they recagnis 

the right of people to self-overnan

        We who love our freedom must hope that the fear of their own 

destruction and the knowledge that our technical skill is superior to 

theirs will force the Cuwmunist leaders to accept this position. if they 

do not, no-one will be able to foretell the future. We must prey for 

the wisdom and strength to pursue the right course in this most difficult
of all problems. If tams is one to which there is no immediate and
clear cut answer, it is also one to which each thinking man and woman must 
give deep and earnest thought.

19/6/57.
The subject of next week's article will be -"i oliticians * alaries and
                                         Allowances".

