<!--start metadata-->
Title: The Army takes to the air
Description: weekly report
Date: c1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


WEEKLY REPORT BY P,2ALCOLIdI FRASER M.P.  )S J Hfi-
                 THE ARMY TAKES TO THE AIR2--ct J v0

             Over last weekend I spent two days with Australian 
Regular Army units participating in one of the largest peace-time 
combined exercises that has ever taken place in Australia - this is 
Operation Longshot.
             Well over 57000 men have been involved. The operation 
has been designed to test not only the equipment and ability and 
training of the Australian Regular Army, but also the supply and 
logistic capability of the Air Force and of the Navy.
             Planning for this exercise began a very long while
ago.  When I visited the Control H.Q., troops had already been in 
the field for some considerable time.
             The exercise was designed to simulate the kind of 
conditions that could confront our Army if we had to operate in the 
South-East Asian theatre or in Malaysia in fulfilment of our 
commitments. The country that had been chosen was extraordinarily 
rough and reasonably heavily timbered, so that visibility was greatly 
reduced. .Shortly after leaving the coast the terrain rose sharply to 
heights of between two and three thousand feet.
             Units of the battle group that were taking part in the 
operation were flown in to Nowra Air Base, but all their stores, 
supplies, equipment and ammunition was trans-shipped from a terminal 
harbour established in Jervis Bay. Several hundred tons of equipment 
and stores were unloaded from H.M.A.S. 'Sydney", the converted troop 
and equipment carrier. The Army L.S.M's wore used for this purpose, 
as were ducks and other unloading vessels. Harbour facilities were 
not used, so that the realism of the exercise in landing without 
external aids could be maintained.
             A base camp was established. fairly close to the 
unloading area and then a forward maintenance area was established 
close to the area of operation of the battle group.

 ~                             -  2

                  Very large volumes of equipment were moved by the 
   R.A.A.F. Hercules, by the new Caribous and by the Iroquois heavy- 
   lift helicopters. These helicopters cannot carry a great bulk 
   inside their own cabin, but they can lift. large and heavy items of 
   equipment by means of a. sling carried outside. The purposes of these 
   three different types of aircraft are obvious - the Hercules can take 
   very large items of equipment and very great weights, but it does 
   need a reasonably good airstrip; the Caribou is smaller with a 
   tremendous short take-off capability for a conventional winged 
   aircraft; and then the Iroquois can take over where the Caribou 
   leaves off and can either land or drop equipment wherever it may be 
  needed.
                  This exercise was largely designed to test the supply
   capability, not only of the naval elements but also of these aircraft. 
  As I understand it, this aspect of the exercise has been an outstanding
   success.   The use of aircraft of this type - especially of the 
  Iroquois - greatly increases the manoeuvrability and the fire power 
  of the man in the field. He can be moved quickly from one place to 
  another, and he can be supplied very rapidly and possibly with less
  effort than if everything had to be moved by land convoy.     This is
*particularly so over certain types cf country. I travelled by Land
  Rover over a good deal of the area in which the battle group was 
  meant to be fighting, and if large heavy convoys had had to take a 
  great deal of equipment through this country there would have been 
  greater problems in clearing roads, and if there had been a little
  more rain it may well have been impossible to keep these roads open. 
  The helicopters avoid much of these difficulties.
                 While the aircraft about which I have been speaking
  are flown by the R.A.A.F., their purpose is almost specifically
  designed to assist and support the Army.    This requires the closest
  co-ordination between the two Services.    In addition the Army has 
  its own light aircraft squadron. In this squadron they have Cessnas
  or small light three-man Sioux helicopters.    These are designed for

  t
                             3
fire control and reconnaissance purposes, and are proving of great 
benefit.
              A great number of people visited this combined 
exercise and I don't think anyone could have failed to have been 
impressed by the efficiency, and, above all, by the enthusiasm of the
personnel involved. There is good reason for this enthusiasm.  The 
Army now knows that it has some of the best equipment available 
anywhere in the world, and there is more equipment coming through of 
the most modern kind as each year passes. In addition to this the 
people I spoke to all recognised that the armed forces may have an 
ever more important part to play in the defence of Australia, and 
they are determined to do this as best they can.

