<!--start metadata-->
Title: Frank Crean, uranium, oil
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 27/10/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL STATEMENT EMBARGO 6.00 p.m.
                        Sunday, Oct, 27

     THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 
             RADIO TALK

Frank Crean

Last week the Treasurer made a speech at the International Dry Clean- 
ing, Laundry and Linen Supply Convention. The Treasurer's speech was 
an enticing document.

The Treasurer pointed out that inflation was largely caused by demand 
and cost pressures and that we had suffered less than other countries 
from overseas induced inflation.

The Treasurer said that inflation hits hardest the weakest sections 
of the community - it punishes families with no incomes, retired 
people who, to their dismay, see their savings being destroyed.

Later in the speech the Treasurer spoke on increasing, the size of the 
national cake rather than merely trying to cut it up differently. 
He spoke of the need for investment in plant and equipment if our 
economy is to grow.

He spoke of the uncertainty caused by inflation which is now running 
over 20% a year. He said that our social and economic system is 
based on dependability through time of a stable monetary standard.

Inflation he said erodes this standard - runaway inflation destroys' 
it.

He said, quoting Maynard Keynes, there is no surer means of over- 
turning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency.

He spoke of the need for profits to be maintained so that investment 
could be continued.

He could have been a Liberal making that speech, but the point I wanted 
to make is that maybe for the first time the Treasurer indicates that 
he understands that inflation is serious. All the more reason there- 
fore why he should do something about it, and that he refuses to do.

I have said before that because of this government's demand for 
Australian resources, private people are being pushed to the wall. 
They struggle to maintain standards but against the weight of demand 
in the government sector they can't do so. The competition between 
government spending and private hopes results in enormous inflation.

•
                               2.

It, will continue until the government moderates their demands - 
until the Labor government ends its extravagent programmes which 
can't be fulfilled.

Purely as a result of this speech at the Dry Cleaning Convention there 
was a clear attempt during the week to take Frank Crean himself to 
the cleaners and during the week some newspapers were rife with talk 
of his resignation. I do not think that could serve any useful pur- 
pose. Nobody in the Australian Labour Party has shown any better 
understanding of the problems we face.

It is the collective wisdom of their cabinet and Caucus which is so 
seriously lacking and which would prevent any Treasurer from taking 
the steps that he ought.

Energy Policy

1. Uranium
There was a debate in the parliament concerning Australia's energy 
resources. Australia is one of the world's major potential sources 
of uranium, but the minister has placed a ban on new exports.

Prices for uranium are high - Australia is therefore denied the 
benefit of export earnings. Companies are frozen. Mr Connor, the 
minister, wants to keep uranium here to enrich it, that is so that 
it can be suitable for nuclear reactors. An enrichment plant would 
cost $2,000,000,000. I don't know who feels like paying for that at 
the moment.

In the meanwhile Australia misses out - the export demand for uran- 
ium won't last forever. The world will probably learn how to dev- 
elop solar and tidal power. They may be more economic and from a 
conservationist's point of view, safer than nuclear power. Uranium 
could become rock in the ground.

2. Oil

Our oil reserves are small by world standards. They will last about 
15 years at the present consumption rate. If we had not found Bass 
Strait oil or established the circumstances to encourage companies 
to find oil, we would have found inflation boosted enormously by 
imported oil costs raising four times over the last year from $US2 
to $US8 a barrel.

Our earlier oil exploration policies have enabled us to be largely 
immune from the immediate effect of rising world oil prices. Even 
in spite of our relative independence, two years ago our oil imports 
cost $169,000,000 in 1973 $600,000,000 and this year they will cost
$1,000,000,000.               .../3

                           3.


Oil is vital to a modern industrial state. I suppose that is why 
the government abolished all exploration incentives. As a result 
the exploration programme in Australia has collapsed. One hundred 
and thirty four wells in the last Liberal year cut in half. to 76 
in 1973 and almost cut in half to 45 in 1974. Most of the big oil 
rigs have left Australia. They are occupied elsewhere.

Australia will pay the price of these two years' mismanagement for 
a long while to come.

