<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 22/04/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


-i"-1-~ C f,'1 ~ `r+'7íT7 é
t _.x,~S~ S ~. r1T.t;1 ~~r. i




i:A CO'Liî FiASE:„:




                                                               April 22nd, l 96






                    Some time ago Sir .ilf rid Kent Hughes was given an 

opportunity to move and spewk to his Private iiembers' ?lotion con- 

cerning National Service Training. - S-.r lilfrid Kent Hughes feels 

very strongly on this particular subject, and that can be readily 

understood when we remember his gallant and courageous record and 

his long history of public service in Australia.




                    The purpose of moving his motion was to have public

discussion over a natter that is clearly of importance.                    Since 

:National Service Training was abandoned at the request of the 

Chiefs of Staff soue tine ago, it is important that the reasons

for this be understood.           Sir Jilfrid does not agree with those 

reasons and his motion provided a most useful opportunity for the 

Parliament to discuss the subject and to have the arguments clari- 

fied.




                         Townley, îiin:i.ster for Defence, spoke some time 

after Sir ',:'ilfrit on the motion and he congratulated Sir .ilfric: 

because, in the main, Sir ! Wilfrid directed the attention of the 

House to the resurgence of Communism in South-East Asia, to the 

possibility of Laos becoming Communist and to the guerilla 

activities in South Vietnam.




                    The Defence ïiinister drew attention to the fact that 

the Chinese Communists have been sending enormous quantities of

argils into Laos and South Vietnam and that, in some instances, the

  ussians themselves have been sending arms into these areas. Uhile 

he agreed with Sir Uilfrid in that the threat from these events was 

very real, he disagreed in part, however, with the methods that Sir

  ilfrid said should be adopted to counter then.




                    i°ír. . Townley recalled that in 1950 when the Government 

introduced universal and compulsory National Service Training, the 

assessment of the threat to this country was quite different from

the present strategic assessment.              It was then thought that global

war was more likely.           China had just emerged as a military power.

The Korean war had just started.             There was no ATZUS treaty, which

is the Australian-Neer Zealand - United States iiutual ^Defence Pact.

There was no SEATO Treaty.            At that time we were on our own except 

for our traditional ties with the United Kingdom and New Z,ealand, 

but since the last war, it has been evident that United Kingdom 

assistance to Australia, because of geographic differences, would be

of a doubtful nature in time or emergency.                In addition , the

strength of Australian Forces was s ver ïi low.            The strength of the 

'Australian Armed Forces in 1950 had been reduced to 50,000. The 

incoming Government in 1950, that is, the present Government, felt 

that this was not sufficient and the ..'once was built up to 05,000.




                    These are the ressens why National Service Training

was introduced in 1930.           !hen it was introduced, the Prime iiinister 

said that if , in the Government's opinion, any alteration became 

necessary, the Government wouldn't hesitate to makeit.




                    In 1; 9, the strategic concept was different from a

decade earlier.          As a result National-Service Training vas abandoned 

on the best professional military advice available in Australia. 

This .advice was endorsed by the military brains of our Allies. It 

is now believed that there is not much likelihood of a global war 

being started deliberately as a result of policy considerations. 

It is, of course, always possible that a vrar can be started to some 

degree by accident but having regard to the dire consequences of 

such a conflict it is not thought that a war would be Started

deliberately.        However, it is thought that limited wars arc likely

                                                                                   /2.

                               - 2 -


and thus Australia's Forces have been, to some extent, re-organised 
so that they can make a quick and effective contribution in a limited
war.   The policy involves active participation with our Allies in
mutual Security arrangements.    Our Forces have become largely 
integrated, so far as supplies are concerned, with the United States.
'Je have concentrated on making our Forces manoeuvrable.  The follow- 
up Forces are more readily available than previously.

               The Einister also pointed outthat the decision to end 
the remnants of National Service Training in 1959 was not taken in
isolation.     At the same time, it was decided to expand the C.E.F. 
to a total of 50,000 men and this target has been achieved.

               mother one agrees or disagrees with the Government or 
with the motion moved by Sir JiifriS Kent Hughes which tried to gain 
support for the re-imposition of National Service Training, one must, 
at any rate, agree that the subject is an important one and that 
great areas are involved which vitally concern the defence and.
security of Australia.

               One would have thought that the Opposition would
welcome such a debate.    It has often been said that debates on
defence or foreign policy are too few and far between in our Parliament.
Sir Wilfrid had provided the opportunity.   The Defence Hinisterehad 
contributed to the seriousness of the discussion by outlining the
changed policy concepts between 1950 and 1960.   He had told us why 
National Service Training was introduced and why it was abandoned.
The Opposition took an extraordinary attitude.   They did not want 
to have any debate on National Service Training or on defence and 
after Sir \7i11 rid had moved his resolution, Er. Townley rose to
speak.   At this stage, Er. Bryant, A.L.P. member for Uills, rose
and put the question.    He moved that the debate be adjourned; in
other words, he did not want a debate to be held.    All the Labour
Party supported him.    There was a division which was won by the 
Government's majority of two because one Labour member was absent. 
After this motion to stop the debate was defeated, Er. Townley
continued to speak.   After Er. Townley had spoken, the Deputy 
Leader of the Opposition, Gough ':Ihitlam, rose and again tried to
move the gag on the debate.   Again the Labour Party voted to prevent
the debate.   Again the Government, even though it did not agree 
with the objective that Sir ïiilfrid was trying to achieve, voted to 
allow the debate to continue because it realised that the subject was 
an important one and that a debate could do much to bring about a 
better understanding of the matter.

               After this vote was lost to the Opposition, Jim Forbes, 
who is the Liberal member for Barker just over the border in South
Australia, rose to speak.   Kim Beasley, whom I like very much, 
almost immediately rose and said he had been misrepresented by the
honourable member for Barker.   There was then a controversy between
the Speaker and Kim Beazley.   Hr. Calwell joined in the controversy'.
Er. 'filitlam joined in the controversy. Eddie mrs from Sydney moved 
that the honourable member for Barker be not further heard. These 
were all designed and deliberate efforts to prevent a debate about
this important element of defence.    It is quite an extraordinary 
attitude for a great political Party to take. I know very well that 
the Leaders of the Labour Party are concerned for the defence of 
Australia and I would not charge otherwise but this is an extra-
ordinary way of showing it.   1Jhat is there to fear from a discussion
on a matter like this?    There is a great deal to be gained. There 
is only one conclusion that Government members have come to and that 
is that the Opposition is so divided amongst itself on this defence 
issue that they were frightened these divisions might become public 
if their members freely participated in the debate.


                                                            /3.

               - 3-


        I certainly hope that, this conclusion is incorrect 
because it would be a sad thing for Australia if the second largest 
Party were divided on issues as important as this, but so far, most 
Government : :iembels think that this, i„ the correct conclusion.

        If anyone would like to read this extraordinary 
debate it would be possible to get a copy of Hansard if you would 
get in touch with me.

