<!--start metadata-->
Title: This matter of wages
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 7/02/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•                     THIS MATTER OF   . (,421,.4,
       In the last few years we have been told many things about costs 
 and our high wage system. I would be the last to say that costs do 
 not matter but at the same time I have not seen one impartial account 
 that gives due weight to all the factors that depend upon our wage 
 level. This is largely because of the difficulty in isolating forces 
 that tend to work in opposite directions and in giving due weight to 
 each.
       The most important consideration is that wage earners should 
 maintain their economic security. What matters to them is not the 
 money wage but the real wage. If the money wage is doubled and the 
 price of goods is also doubled the real wage remains the same but if 
 the price of goods rises less than wages then real earnings are 
 increased. It would be a brave government indeed that did anything 
 to lower real wages for if each wage earner cut his consumption of 
 goods by even a small amount due to his decreased real wage the overall 
 deflationary result would be serious.
       It is argued that the cheaper prices resulting from lower gages 
 would enable us to export more but that is not going to help the wage 
 earner with his decreased real wage. The first consideration of any 
 government must be the prosperity and happiness of its own people.
       It is no coincidence that the highest wage country in the world 
 is the most efficient in terms of output per man hour. In the United 
 States labour is scarce and dear while capital and machinery have been 
 relatively cheap. Hence where they could employers have been forced 
 to use machinery that led to high output per man hour. High wages have 
 thus resulted not only in efficient factories but also in high 
 purchasing power for the wage earner.
       It is possible for a country to get into difficulties in 
 international trade if its cost system increases more than those in 
 other countries. Under the gold standard the remedy for this used to 
 be an automatic tightening of credit that led to deflation and 
 unemployment till costs were brought into line. This remedy is harsh 
 and can only be effective through great hardship to the wage earner.

 r                                               2

It will never again be used. International organisations have recognised 
that domestic happiness must not be made to suffer for the sake of 
international trade. There are other equally effective remedies.
         The real cost of production does not rise and real wages do 
not alter if output per man hour increases as does the money wage. 
If money costs remain the same and if output per man hour increases 
then the cost of production is decreased and the real wage is increased. 
This stimulates further domestic consumption and at the same time 
makes goods more saleable abroad. It is largely this remedy that has 
cured England's financial ills since the war.
         If it is       '. ssi •..                  cós-e--l-ine with overseas
thr,o --gr-eater prodú • .               • = • . = •reciation of our currency should
be made. °This          a per e                                      -cure permanent
diseq                       ---terms.__.nf__tr-ade.
         It is true that Australian costs have risen too much compared 
with other countries while our production has lagged behind. The 
answer to this problem is to concentrate on those things that we can 
produce cheaply and efficiently and to work for greater productivity. 
In this way both the country's trade balance and the wage earner will 
benefit. The people who talk of reducing our actual and real wages 
are taking their economic practice and theory from the nineteenth 
century when depressions were the accepted order of things.
         If Australians all recognised that these are things of the past 
and all worked together to achieve greater efficiency in industry the 
question of costs would resolve itself.

