<!--start metadata-->
Title: Some more on credit restrictions
Description: press statement
Date: 28/05/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                       /2íi:.
    PRESS STATEMENT -                                                 May 28th,1961
    MALCOLM FRASER:
                             SOME MORE ON CREDIT RESTRICTIONS


                   Another matter occurred which is of greater national significance 
    and which has aroused some uneasiness throughout Australia.

                   At the end of last week we awoke to find headlines in the national press
    that credit restrictions were going to remain in force until June, 1962.   The strong 
    implication was that there had been an official announcement that these restrictions
    would remain at their present level all this time.   It was said that this was evident
    from Australia's application before the International Monetary Fund.     I have read 
    the document which Australia placed before the Fund, and it could never be implied 
    from it that credit restrictions are going to remain in force at the present level for 
    all this time.

-s[                It is quite correct that credit restrictions consistent with stability and
    a proper level of progress will be maintained, but that is quite different from saying 
    that the restrictions will be maintained at the present level and severity.

                   Indeed, three days after this report it was in substance contradicted 
    by the Governor of the Commonwealth Bank who announced the release of about £17M. 
    from Special Deposits to the Trading Banks, a release designed to cover a seasonal 
    demand for credit.

                   Furthermore, because of the reduction in the level of house building the 
    Commonwealth has made further credit available in certain spheres in this regard and, 
-^..in addition, it has decided that the interim measure regarding non-deductibility for notes 
    and debentures introduced last November will not be renewed after the end of this
    financial year.   These matters all support the fact that the credit restrictions and 
    control will be maintained consistent with stability and progress, and that does not 
    mean credit restrictions of the severity of a few weeks ago will be maintained for a
    further fourteen months.     What has happened in regard to those measures that I have 
    indicated represents a complete denial of the substance of the report as it appeared in
    the national press.    Let me quote from Australia's application before the International.
    Monetary Fund:-

                   " .............. the monetary authorities intend to keep a firm control 
    over the liquidity position of the Banks, with a view to limiting during the year ending 
    June, 1962, the amount of outstanding Bank advances to a total that would be consistent 
    with the maintenance of financial stability."


                                                                                          2

•PRESS STATEMENT -
 MALCOLM FRASER:
                           SOME MORE ON CREDIT RESTRICTIONS - Page 2

                This says that there are going to be credit restrictions, but it does 
 not say that they are going to remain at the present level.

                The application goes on to say that "Under present conditions this 
 should preclude more than a moderate increase in advances over the year." 
 So far from saying that restrictions will remain at the present level for the full 
 period,, the application actually suggests that there will be a moderate increase in 
 Bank advances.

                The report appearing in the form that it did was mischievous.

                In case you may have forgotten what the International Monetary Fund 
 is, it is an organization established on an international level to assist countries 
 maintain stability and to assist countries who may experience shortages of overseas
 funds.   Most of the free countries of the world belong to the International Monetary
 Fund.    Australia joined under the signature of the previous Labour Prime Minister,,
 Mr. Chifley, in 1947.    The purpose of the Fund is to do what it can to assist 
 international trade, to see that artificial barriers to trade are not erected and to 
 help individual countries with currency problems where it is in the Fund's power to 
 do so.

                It is worth noting that the Fund only assists those countries that it
 thinks are carrying out sound financial policies. It would certainly not assist 
 Australia or make funds available if it felt that Australia was pursuing unwise
 policies.   The fact that the Fund has been prepared to assist Australia in the 
 terms that it has indicates the level of confidence that the overseas world has in 
 this country.

