<!--start metadata-->
Title: Specific budget proposals
Description: Press release
Date: 21/08/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS REi.EAS4s

 ~      SPECIFIC MIDGET PROPOSALS
        By s Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.

In this article you may remember that, two weeks ago, I wrote about 
the general framework of the Budget and the principles upon which it 
has been based at the present time. The limiting factor on the amount 
of concessions that could be given in this year was the extent to which 
the Government was prepared to go into the "red". As it is, it will be 
spending £110 Million more than it will be receiving, and as I said 
before, it would be unwise at the present time for this figure to be 
exceeded because"deficit financing of this kind must, to a certain 
extents increase our demand for imports and it would be foolish to do 
this when export prices are low.

There is one point I would like to make which is an effect of last 
year's Budget. Last years considerable concessions were made which 
would total 06 Million in a full year but which only totalled a 
little over £20 Million last years the reason for that being that the 
Budget was brought in well after the financial year had begun and the 
extra concessions did not work for the full year. Therefore, as a 
result of last year's Budgets the concessions for this year are 
greater than one might originally think.

Primary producers should be glad to know that the special depreciation 
allowance which has operated since 1951 and which was to end at June 
30th, 1959 has been extended for a further 3 years to Junes 1962. 
This is the provision under which 20% of the capital value of pretty 
well every kind of investment for the land is allowed as a taxation 
deduction in each 5 years. There is a welcome extension of this 
depreciation allowance to the fishing and pearling industries. I 
hope this will aid quite an important section of Australian primary 
producers and I hope also that it will be of local benefit to the 
fishermen of Port Fairy or Portland.

The Government has given much greater taxation reductions to people 
who live in our remote north and in the northern areas of Western
Australia but the Treasurer also said, quite categorically, that

                     - 2 -
these taxation reductions do not represent the Government's last wed 
on '43e problems. I believe that, as a result of the Prime Minister's 
visit to these areas in the last few months, he has been deeply impressed 
by the need for further assistance and further development and the 
Government will be considering ways and means to bring this about.
Greater incentives have also been given to those who invest in oil
exploration.
Small increases have also been given in certain Repatriation and Social 
Service benefits. The special rate war pension for cases of totally and 
permanently incapacitated ex-servicemen has been increased 10/- per week 
to make a pension of £11.10.0. The allowance for children and the domestic 
allowance for war widows has also been increased.
In the field of Social Services, the Government has recognised an 
important new principle. In the past, the pension rate has been a flat 
rate for all pensioners and no allowance has been given for the fact 
that some pensioners, under the Social Service benefits, can be well 
off while others can be suffering extremely severe hardship. For 
example, it is possible for a married couple to own their own home 
and get the maximum pension each and the maximum permissible income 
making a total of £15.15.0. Such a pensioner couple should be able 
to live in comfort. On the other hand, it is possible for a pensioner 
to have nothing but the pension and to have to pay rant in addition. 
The Government has recognised that those pensioners who do not own 
their own homes and who have to pay rent are in a special category 
and it is proposed to give them supplementary assistance of 10/- a weak.
I believe that as time continues, this process of special allowance 
will be continued and I believe in this way we will be able to relieve 
hardship amongst a gmater number of pensioners and, at the same time, 
we will get better value for money for the taxpayers of Australia who 
must, of course, pay for the pensions.
In addition to this innovations the property limit to the imans test 
has been very greatly relieved. For a single person it has been

                    - 3 -
raised £500 to £2,250 and for a carried couple it has been raised 
Llt00 to £4,500. Gunerakip of your own home does not count as 
property for means test purposes.
If any person is not sure whether or not they are entitied to a 
pension under the new arrangements or whether or not they are
entitled to this new rent allowance, I would strongly reevsend that 
they contact the local Social Services Office or myself.
There is one final thing that I would like to say. When we speak of 
these pensions in terms of individuals the amount seems small but 
when we add up the totals they are very large indeed, much larger 
than most people would thick. For instance, the total cost of 
Repatriation Services is just under £130 Million, and the cost of all 
our Social Services, including hospital and medical benefits is over 
£273 Million making a total of £400 Million, which is, roughly one-third 
of the revenue available to the Commonwealth.






August 21st, 1958.

