<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters
Description: Radio speech
Date: c1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        RADIO SPEECH
          by
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND MEMBER FOR WANNONJ MR. MALCOLM FRASER

     Parliament is in full swing again and Members
and Senators are occupied with the many tasks and the often
exacting demands placed upon them in terms of time, volume
and intensity of work.
     There is a great deal of research to be done,
and much effort goes into the preparation of questions and
the analysis of legislation and indeed into every statement
of substance made in the Parliament.
     In this session Parliament is providing a challenge
to the analytical capacity of Parliamentarians. In the recess
since Parliament last met, there has been established some
sort of record in the volume of legislation prepared by
regular and lengthy sittings of Cabinet. Not since World 
War II, I am told, has a Cabinet flung itself with such 
determination and tenacity into formulation of new measures, 
affecting such a wide area of the Australian population.
     The Press has always been quick to criticise
unduly long periods of Parliamentary recess, because the 
Press maintains - and righfully so - that the Parliament 
and those who serve it are there to serve the people, and 
that a Parliament too long between sessions is not good 
for the democratic process and deprives the people of a 
voice. This leads me to further comments about the 
extraordinarily active period involving Cabinet Ministers 
over the past few months. That exhaustive series of meetings 
produced a number of decisions that will keep the Parliament 
very busy this session.
    The decisions affect a wide range of issues.
The Government decided to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty, on the express understanding that Australia was not 
automatically committed to ratification. The Treaty is 
not binding until it is ratified, and before it is ratified 
the Australian Government would want to have a number of 
assurances about the Treaty. The Government is resolutely

          2.
opposed to the spread of nuclear weapons, and has always
supported the proposal for a Treaty designed to achieve
this. But we want a Treaty that is going to be effective,
and we do not believe that as yet sufficient nations have
signed or ratified the Treaty to render it fully effective.
Nevertheless, Japan and West Germany recently signed, and
this has added to the prospects for a more effective Treaty.
But Japan and West Germany, too, have signed with reservations.
The Government regards it as essential that the Treaty should
not affect continuing security commitments under existing
security treaties. The Government noted that the Treaty
would not inhibit but would assist the application of atomic
energy for peaceful purposes in. Australia. It considered it
essential, however, that the inspection and safeguards
arrangements should not burden research, development, production
and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It considered
that these arrangements should not constitute an obstacle to
a nation's economic development, commerical interests and
trade. They should be effective in ensuring that any breaches
of the Treaty would be detected.
     A step forward was made in Commonwealth/State
relationships late last month at the Premiers' Conference
in Canberra. The Commonwealth agreed in principle that
there was a need for a more rapid growth each year in State
revenue grants, and this will be discussed with the States.
The Commonwealth suggested that it should gradually assume
full responsibility for a proportion of State debt - perhaps
to the extent of $1,000 millions. The Commonwealth would
not, however, vacate part of the personal' or company income
tax field because it felt rates in these fields should be
uniform and that personal income tax rates should come down
from their present levels.
     But the Commonwealth undertook to join with the
States in examining any proposals made by the States for an
alternative field of growth tax. The Prime Minister announced
a special revenue grant of $12 million for the States, of
which Victoria's share was set at $3 million.

           3.
     In early February the Commonwealth heard the 
cases put forward by representatives of industry and 
commerce - at the half yearly economic consultations. 
Included were submissions from the primary industry group 
and these were again valuable in providing i,inisters with 
the views of the organisations concerned.
     Last year the Government embarked on the most 
intensive social welfare programme in Australia's history. 
Many changes were made, benefiting the aged, the sick and 
the needy. During the current session of Parliament the 
Minister for Health unveiled the Government's new health 
benefits plan to carry out the Government's undertaking 
to minimise the gap between cost of health services to 
the patient and his return in Commonwealth and health fund 
payments. I will go into this in more detail on a later 
occasion.
     On the opening day of Parliament, the Governor- 
General outlined the very heavy programme of legislation 
which Cabinet formulated during the recess.
     A proposal which has attracted some publicity 
is the Industry Development Corporation, which the Government 
believes should help to bring about greater Australian 
participation in development of our resources.
     It is designed to tap sources of overseas funds, 
which Australian companies - lacking the investment appeal 
abroad of large international companies - have been generally 
unable to utilise. These Australian companies often therefore 
accept a smaller stake in development in Australia than they 
otherwise would. It is not intended that the Corporation 
should have the status of a bank or that any loans negotiated 
would be guaranteed by the Commonwealth. It would in no way 
conflict with the functions of the States or in any way affect 
their freedom in industry matters. The Government will 
introduce a bill in Parliament to implement the proposal.

            4.
      The outline of legislation contained proposals 
to advance Papua and New Guinea further along the road to 
self-governmedt and eventual independence. Ministerial 
Members are to be given full, instead of shared authority, 
for their Departments, and other changes will be made to 
give elected members a greater say in the actual drafting 
of the Territory budget. The Territory's House of Assembly 
will be asked to establish a statutory corporation to acquire 
equity in major investment projects in the Territory.
      Other legislative proposals included the agreement 
reached by the Commonwealth, New South .`ales, Victoria and 
South Australia for construction of the Dartmouth Dam, which 
will permit storage of about three million acre feet.
      The Government is also over the next five years 
providing elOO million for new proposals under the National 
Water Resources Development Programme. This covers proposals 
for flood prevention and flood mitigation works,
      The Government is to seek sovereign rights over 
the resources of the seabed from low water mark to the 
outer limits of the continental shelf off the Australian 
coast.There is a proposal to assist those seeking their 
own home. The plan is to liberalise eligibility for the 
homes savings grant. Permissible limit on the value of a 
house will be raised by $2,000 to x17,5fl0 and savings in 
credit unions approved will qualify as savings to attract 
the grant.
      Proposals affecting primary producers were 
outlined - including plans to halve the present levy on 
woolgrowers for research and promotion and double the 
Government's contribution to a maximum annual level of $27 
million; the furthering of efforts to expand our meat 
markets abroad; the wool marketing proposals; a decision 
that CSIRO and the Australian Wheat Board collaborate in 
setting up and operating a laboratory to conduct research 
into grain storage problems.

           5.
      It would be impossible to detail here the entire 
volume of proposals which has occupied Cabinet and the 
administrative machinery of Government over the past months. 
I will, however, refer in more detail to some of these as 
they unfold in the legislative programme.

