<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool marketing, 25-hour week, primary producers, United Kingdom levies on imports
Description: Radio talk
Date: 1/11/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•

   RADIO TALK                                Sunday 1st November 1970 — 3 HA
                                           Thursday 5th November 1970 — 3 YB
             This week I would like to talk with you about the Australian Wool 
   Commission marketing scheme...implications of a 35—hour working week on primary 
   producers, and proposals by the United Kingdom to introduce levies on imports of 
   agricultural commodities.
             Because of the decline in wool prices the Australian Wool Commission 
   marketing authority, scheduled to commence operating next July, could start early 
   in the New Year.
             My colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Doug Anthony, 
   indicated this shortly after introducing the Wool Commission Bill in Parliament.
             It is likely that the Commission will now commence operations in January. 
   Because of the continuing fall in wool prices, it is hoped to have the Commission 
   operating a reserve price system within the wool auction as soon as possible as 
   a matter of urgency.
             The legislation introduced in the House of Representatives closely follows 
   the recommendation made to the Government by the economist, Sir John Crawford, in a 
   detailed report early in October.
             To assist in early implementation of the marketing authority there is 
   provision in the Bill for the appointment of an interim Chairman pending the 
   appointment of the fulltime Chairman. The main reason for this is to ensure the 
   early establishment of the Commission as it could take some time to find a
   suitable fulltime Chairman.
             The Commission will consist of seven members, including the Chairman. 
   Two of the members will represent Australian woolgrowers and one will be the 
   Commonwealth Government representative.
             The three other members will be men with special qualifications. They 
   will be experienced in the fields of either:
             •  Wool marketing or marketing wool products;
             •  Wool processing or manufacturing of wool products;
             •  Or, experienced in commerce, finance or economics.
             The Government has given careful consideration to the composition of the 
   Commission to ensure it is not unwieldly.
             The main function of the Commission is to operate a flexible reserve 
   price scheme for wool offered for sale at auction.
             I must emphasise that the reserve price scheme to be operated by the 
   Commission will be on a flexible basis and not one with reserve prices fixed for 
   the whole season.
             The flexible reserve price scheme will not defy or force the market. It 
   will test it to get the best price obtainable at the time and to minimise the 
   losses associated with the growing instabilities in the auction system. /2

i
                      2.
      The Government has decided that no quantitative or financial limits should 
be placed on the amount of wool which can be purchased and held by the Commission.
      This is a point I must stress as some local growers who visited me here in 
Canberra believed that the Commission would be limited to buying 10% of the Clip. 
This is not correct.
      Discussions have been held with the State Ministers for Agriculture, through the 
Australian Agricultural Council. The State Ministers have given their unanimous support 
in principle for the establishment of the Wool Commission.
      Some matters may ultimately require supporting State legislation such as
giving compulsive power to the Commission to:
      • Set the terms and conditions governing sale of wool at auction;
      . If necessary, to control private buying and selling of wool outside the 
         auction system;
      . Enforce standards of clip preparation for wool sold outside the auction 
         system for use within a State.
      The State Ministers have agreed to consider these matters and provision 
has been made in the Bill for possible State legislation.
      The Australian Wool Industry has asked for an assurance that the Commission shoul• 
not have the power to establish quotas on wool production in Australia. I emphasise that 
such a power has not been envisaged for the Commission and, in any event, the Commonwealth 
Government could not, for Constitutional reasons, confer it on the Commission without 
the approval of the States.

      Australian Labor Party members this week obviously did not do their homework 
properly in advocating a 35—hour working week and minimising its possible effects on the 
primary producer.
      They said that such a working arrangement would only have a very insignificant 
impact on the costs of the man on the land.
      One Labor member indicated that the increased cost of a bushel of wheat would 
only be 2.5 cents and that the 35—hour working week would mean only a one—eighth increase 
in the cost of farm labour.
      The facts are that a 12%, or one—eighth decrease in working hours in a week 
would mean a one—seventh, or 14.3%, increase in labour costs.
      In fact, if you consider total farm labour costs, which include labour costs
of the owner or owners, and his or their families, the increased cost of a bushel of
wheat would not be 2.5 cents, but six cents.
      If you take into account effects of a shorter working week and the consequential
increases in rates, freight charges, cost of materials — the full impact is an increase
of 13 cents a bushel.
                                      /3

               3.
     The effect on the farmer and his income is of course obvious.
     If we consider the wool industry in the higher rainfall areas, the 
grower would be faced with a 20% reduction in net income. If you calculate on 
the total cost there would be a 40% decline in their net income.
     In the dried vine-fruit industry, if we consider the labour content, 
there would be a reduction of one-third in net farm income.
     In the dairying industry there would be a reduction of 37% in net income. 
It would mean a difference of four cents a pound for commercial butterfat at the 
farm gate.
     Not by any stretch of the imagination could you describe these facts and 
figures as having only insignificant impact on the promary producers costs.


     This week the British Government announced its intention to introduce a 
system of levies on the imports into the United Kingdom of a number of agricultural 
commodities.
     The products concerned are beef and veal, mutton and lamb, cereals and milk 
powders, condensed milk and cream.
     At present these products all enter the United Kingdom free of duty as a 
right under our trade agreement with Britain, which can be terminated by six months 
notice by either side.
     The British say that their main objective in imposing the levy system is to 
reduce claims on public expenditure, caused by their present subsidy system to 
support their own agricultural industry.
     It is clear to me that this is a deliberate move to adapt their 
arrangements in view of their prospective membership of the European Economic 
Community, when they would be adopting the Common Agricultural Policy of the EEC.
     The British have asked us to join them in talks on commodities of interest 
to Australia and a senior officer of the Department of Trade and Industry has been 
sent to London to attend these talks.
     The British Government's objective is to bring the new measures into 
operation at least by Anril 1st next year.
     The British proposals have very important implications for our future trade 
and trading relations. For the first time the Australian products concerned will 
be faced with real barriers to trade in this traditional market outlet.
     The Australian Government will be carefully studying the implications 
of the British proposals as we now understand them - and as they are elaborated 
during the forthcoming talks in London.
     We will, of course, be taking a hard look at the balance of benefits under 
our trade agreement with Britain and we will be assessing, at the appropriate time, 
what adjustment to Australia's ooligation under the agreement will be required.

