<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian troops in Vietnam
Description: press statement
Date: 9/05/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT

NALCOLM FRASER

                                                  May 9th, 1965



                For the past two or three weeks I have been wanting to 
talk-about the Commonwealth's decisions concerning tertiary education, the 
proposed referendum and re-distribution, but once again something has 
occurred which has pushed these domestic problems into the background.

                The Government's decision to send a battalion to South 
Vietnam is being bitterly opposed by the Opposition. Nobody for ome 
moment likes the idea of sending Australian troops to South: East Asia, 
nobody likes the idea of sending Australian troops into combat, but 
that does not mean that a decision of this kind is not the right one 
when judged in terms of our own security. Too many times democracies 
in freedom-loving countries like Australia have put themselves into 
impossible positions because they did not recognise danger when it arose, 
because they delayed acting until it was much too late.

                In the years since the last war major disasters have 
so far been avoided because the Western world has been prepared to act 
and because our opponents have known it.

                On February 18th the Labour Party issued a statement 
about American policy in South Vietnam, and I would like to quote a 
part of it. The statement refers to the purpose of American inter- 
vention and action in North Vietnam in support of South Vietnam --

                "This statement of American purposes is unexceptionable, 
     and the case of the American action of recent days --

(that is referring to the bombing of North Vietnam)

                --- as based on the aim of shortening the war and 
                 achieving a negotiated settlement which will 
                 establish and maintain the rights of the South 
                 Vietnamese people deserves sympathetic Australian 
                 understanding a...."

A little later on, the Labour Party's statement continues

                "The demand of the Soviet Government for the 
                 immediate departure of all American and other 
                 foreign forces from South Vietnam would be in the 
                 interests neither of the people of South Vietnam
                 nor of the people of Australia. Its immediate 
                 consequences must be a Communist takeover in South. 
                 Vietnam, snuffing out the hope of freedom and of 
                 democratic independence in that country and extend- 
                 ing the area of Communist control closer to this 
                 country. The presence of those forces is necessary
                 and justified as a holding operation   IT

This is adequate and rational support for American troops in South Vietnam 
and for American bombing of North Vietnam. It is a view which, at the 
time it was expressed, would be close to the Government's view. Now 
Nr. Calwell and the Labour Party opposes an Australian addition to these 
forces. There can only be two interpretations of this action. It means 
on the one hand that the Australian Labour Party is prepared to shelter 
behind the troops and the strength of the United States , while we our- 
selves do not make a comparable effort,having regard to our size and the 
dangers that confront us living on the edge of Asia; and here let me 
remind you that Nr.Calwell has said that the withdrawal of American troops



                                                            /2

                          2 -



would not be in the interests of the people of South Vietnam nor of the 
people of Australia. This means that the troops are necessary, but in 
Mr. Calwell's eyes American troops and not Australian ones, There 
 could be another interpretation, that the Labour Forty has now turned 
its back on this statement of February 18th, and that it would prefer 
 to see American troops withdrawn fi'oin South Vietnam. If this is so it 
is worth again recalling the paragraph from the Labour Party statement 
in which it said that the consequences of American withdrawal must be 
a Communist takeover, snuffing out the hope of freedom and of democratic 
independence in South Vietnam. One of these interpretations must be 
the correct one. There is no other possible cohclusion to be drawn from 
the Labour Party's attitude.

            The Labour Party's decision is all the more surprising 
 because Mr. Colwell himself said in the debate -

            "That there has long been and still is, aggression 
            from the North and subversion inspired from the North, 
            I do not for one moment deny."

A little later on he said -

            "I agree that the pace of North Vietnamese aggression - 
            that is the only word for it - has increased" ,

and later still, after talking of the difficulties of military operations 
in the Vietnamese territory, he continued -

           "but it will be said, even if this is true, that 
            there are far larger considerations. China must 
            be stopped, the United States must not be humiliated 
            in Asia. I agree whole-heartedly with both these 
            propositions."

That is the Leader of the Opposition talking. How can he agree with 
these things and, at the same time, be totally unprepared to do anything
about it. There has been a suggestion that because the Government is 
sending some troops to South Vietnam we are turning our back on 
negotiations. This is very far from the truth. A sLrong military . 
stance at the present time will provide the only road to negotiations. 
Recent events have made this all too clear. North Vietnam and Communist 
China have so far refused all offers of negotiations. They have laid 
down two pre-conditions that the Americans must first withdraw, against 
the wishes of the South Vietnamese Government and that discussions could. 
only be held between Communist groups, between North Vietnam and the 
Viet Cong in the South. They both rejected the President's offer for 
unconditional discussions on April 7th. They told both U Thant, United 
Nations &enretary-General,and the British Prime Minister's special 
representative, Gordon Welker, to remain out of Peking and Hanoi; they 
rejected an appeal by seventeen uncommitted nations on April 1st, they 
rejected the Indian President's proposal for a cease-fire and are trying 
to prevent the conference taking place on the problems of Cambodia, situated 
next door to Vietnam.

           There have been several vigorous attempts to bring the 
parties to an appropriate negotiation. The Communist parties have 
rejected all of them. The Australian decision doesn't mean that we turn 
our backs on negotiation. It means that we are doing what we can to 
support our allies, and that this has been made necessary because the 
other parties to the conflict will not negotiate.

