<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 23/04/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       BROADCAST                           3HA Sunday, 23rd April, 1972. 
                                           3YB Thursday, 27th April, 1972. 
                                           3LK Tuesday, 25th April, 1972.


                 A week or so ago, I had considered talking to you about 
       Vietnam, particularly in the light of the attitude which Dr. Cairns,
       the Labor front bencher, continues to take. Now I am pleased that 
       I didn't, because the situation in the Labor Party in Victoria has 
       developed since then to a remarkable extent.
                 Anyone reading the papers and watching television in the 
       last fortnight or so must be absolutely convinced of a basic truth 
       about the South—East Asian situation — that North Vietnam has invaded 
       South Vietnam and is the clear and undeniable aggressor.
                 This was one of the premises on which the Government made 
       its decision to assist South Vietnam, and this was one of the premises
       which the Labor Party refused to accept. Or did they all refuse to 
       accept it ? Five years ago, the official Labor spokesman on defence, 
       Mr. Barnard, conceded on his return from a visit to South—East Asia 
       that there had been a large scale North Vietnamese invasion of South
       Vietnam.Three years later, another prominent Labor Parliamentarian, 
411    Mr. Gordon Bryant, called for Australian assistance for the Cambodian
       Government against the Communists. He, too, had visited South—East 
       Asia and he, too, as a responsible Member of Parliament, had
       recognised the truth.  They accepted the fundamental grounds which 
       motivated the Australian Government to help an independent Asian 
       nation defend that independence against wholesale aggression from 
       the Communist North Vietnam.
                But, sadly, Mr. Barnard and Mr. Bryant represent a rather 
       unhappy minority within the Labor movement in Australia. They were 
       soon submerged and silenced on their return from overseas, as Dr.
       Cairns resumed his post of effective spokesman on defence and 
       foreign policy in the Labor Party.

r

                                      2.

                  In the last fortnight, Dr. Cairns has demonstrated that
       he has abdicated none of that authority.     First he called for a
       mass return to the streets in protest against the intensified war
       in Vietnam and the alleged U.S. invasion there.     He also declared
       that he was convinced North Vietnam was fully justified in taking 
       military action in South Vietnam.
                 Dr. Cairns' exhortations are far more serious than isolated
       cries of an obscure individual.    They are points ov view from one 
       of Labor's most senior Parliamentary representatives, a certain
       Minister in any Labor Government.    In an ABC interview he claims 
       to have been praised by Mr. Whitlam for his views.
                 Despite Mr. Barnard, Mr. Bryant and their few associates, 
       Dr. Cairns, secure in the knowledge of the support his pro-North 
      Vietnam attitude has within the Labor movement, especially in
      Victoria, continued to champion that view with calls for mass demonstrat- 
       ions, and this from a man who eighteen months ago said "I sincerely 
      hope that authority has had its day".
•                A week or two ago, I could have ended my remarks there, 
      and perhaps some people might have had lingering doubts about my
      concern at the extreme views of Dr. Cairns and the dominant left-wing 
      of the Labor Party whose attitudes he articulates.
                 If there were such doubts, the Victorian Labor Party soon
      dispelled them.    A few days later the Party's State Council voted 
      approval of a military victory for the North Vietnamese and the 
      National Liberation Front.
                This is one of the saddest political decisions ever made
      in this country.   Victorian Labor has declared a moral alliance with 
      the North Vietnamese invaders and has expressed as their resolution
     stated, "satisfaction with the recent progress of the Front in 
     extending the liberated areas of South Vietnam."

                 3.
           It has shamefully espoused the cause of the enemy,
   for that is the role in which the North Vietnamese have cast themselves.
   Thousands of Australian troops fought for years in South Vietnam
   to help that country remain independent, and some of them died for
   that cause and for Australia. In fact, there are still about 150
   Australians in South Vietnam acting as advisers. They have the
   cold comfort of knowing that in Victoria, the A.L.P. is barracking
   for the North Vietnamese.
      Mr Whitlam can protest as much as he likes. The fact
   is that he is stuck with a Party whose policies are easily shaped
   by the left-wing, easily explained by the left-wing, and all too
   easily implemented by them if Labor became Government. And to
   think that only last year Mr Whitlam was proclaiming that the
   reconstituted Victorian State Council reflected moderate views.
      Victorian Labor's advocacy of a military victory for
   North Vietnam is outrageous.
      The logical extension of their views would be abolition
   of any alliance with the United States. That the Labor Party
•  would replace that with, that I don't know. If you think this far 
   fetched, let me quote Dr Cairns again. He said in an ABC interview, 
   " Well I think the United States has got to realise if they go on 
   behaving like an aggressive nation, somebody is going to tell them 
   that".
      Those are surely the words of someone who would want to
   break with the United States, and Dr Cairns has great influence in 
   the labor movement.

