<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 15/10/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PRESS STATEMENT
                                                         October 15th,1961

                          During the last few weeks, the main business of Parliament
              has been the discussion of the Estimates. In this discussion, 

               the estimates of expenditure by different Departments are dealt with 
               on a reasonably detailed basis. Departments are taken separately 

               and members may raise any aspect of the administration or expenditure 
               of the different Departments.

                          In the last week, I spoke briefly on the Estimates for 
               the Department of Primary Industry, and also on the Cattle Slaughter 

              Levy Bill which was introduced by Mr. Adermann.
                          In the Estimates debate I drew attention to the important 
              work done by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and suggested that 
               the resources of this Bureau should be expanded. The work of this 
              Bureau plays a significant part in the formation of future policy. 
              This is because of the reputation the Bureau has built up for sound 

              analysis of an existing situation and of the trends for the future. 
              For example, surveys done by the Bureau played not a small part in 
              the Government's decision to construct beef roads in Northern 

•             Australia.
                           I turned by attention in particular to information that 

              I had obtained from the Bureau regarding Australia's superphosphate 
              reserves. There is no need to emphasise the importance of super-
              phosphate in this country.  It is not only needed in the temperate 
              parts of Australia. C.ù.I.R.O. experiments in the Northern Territory, 
              in the Kimberleys and in Queenslana show that this land, when it 
              is eventually used on a more intensive basis, will also require 
              large quantities of superphosphate.
                            So far, Australia has been most fortunate in having 

              cheap and plentiful supplies of super available. The main reserves 
              that are used by this country are found in Nauru, Ocean Island and 

•             Christmas Island. At the present rate of use, these reserves will 
              last about 40 years. Now, some people might say that 40 years is 
              a long way in the future and a lot of us will be dead, but our 
              sons will not be, and if they are going to be efficient farmers 

              in this country, it is probable that they will require large 
              quantities of super even if the existing resources have been used.

                            Since the beginning of the second World war, 
              Australia's annual super consumption has indreased from 1 million
              to 2 million tons a year. There is a pretty good likelihood that 
              this increase will continue.
                         Even though the estimates of reserves on Nauru and 
              Christmas Island might well be conservative, the probable increased 
              demand for super inside Australia must also be taken into account 

              and therefore the exhaustion of these reserves in 40 years' time 

              is something that we must take-into consideration when planning 
              long term policies. It is true that alternative sources of
              supply on an almost unlimited basis are apparently available from 
              countries like Morocco, Tunisia, Algiers, the United States,
              Russia or Egypt.  However, supplies from these areas would be

                                            2

                 considerably more expensive than the present suppliers of super-
                 phosphate.   They could be double the present price.  What the 
                 Australian farmer needs is not more expensive super but cheaper 
                 super because this is an important item in his cost structure. 
                        You may ask where does this information get us; what can
                 we do about it? I think we can do quite a lot.    In improving
                 Australian pastures we know how to bring unimproved pasture up
                 to what I like to call the first stage of development. In our
                 own area we can establish good clover and rye pastures or clover
                 and phalaris pastures, but this is the first stage. In doing
                 this, we might put on one bag or even two bags of super to
                 the acre for 2 or 3 years and then the amount we put on might
                 be reduced to half a bag a year and we go on putting on this amount
                 each year pretty well indefinitely.  However, after the initial 
                 boost to productivity after the clover and rye grass have been 
                 properly established, we do not see any further real change in 
                 the carrying capacity of the land which seems to remain at a 
                 dtatic higher level.
•                      At this stage we run short of knowledge.  It may be that 
                 after land has had one ton or 30 cwt of super put on it, that 
                 the annual requirement should be reduced to 30 or 40 lb.s 
                 Indeed, this has been found to be the case in small isolated 
                 ares in the wheat belt of 'South Australia. On the other hand, 
                 in some cases, it has been found that to make the greatest use 
                 of our relatively high rainfall an even increased quantity of 
                 super together with some other things such as lime or potash
                 could greatly improve carrying capacity.  There are some farmers 
                 in parts of Australia who do this but, broadly, after the improved
                 pastures have been established, what we then do is based on 
                 guess work and instincts It is not based on precise knowledge. 
•                      In some overseas countries, if a farmer wants to grow a 
                 certain crop he can send a sample of his soil together with the 
                 history of the particular paddock away to a research laboratory.
                 He will then be told how much and what kind of fertiliser to
                 use to grow a certain crop most successfully.  Our Australian 
                 Research Organizations say that, in this country, we have not
                 sufficient knowledge to establish a service of this kind in
                 Australia on an accurate and useful basis.  Our research
                 Organizations will say that there are factors prevalent in 
                 Australia which rakes it unwise to apply overseas practices
                 directly to Australia without intensive research. Based on 
                 the record of C.6.I.R.O. I would think that these conclusions
                 are correct.  However, this does not mean that we should not 
                 aim towarus this kind of service to farmers. If farmers in 
                 improved lands could be tolu precisely how much and what kind 
                 of fertiliser to usd for different crops or for different 
                 pastures they would get the best and most economic use from the 
                 fertilisers which they used. If this kind of knowledge were 
                 available it might well show that after a considerable quantity 
                 of super had been put on the land that only small annual dressings

                          -  3 -
were needed to maintain productivity. This would have a
significant effect on oats.
         however, without this precise knowledge farmers are reluctant 
to reduce their super too much in case productivity should fall.
         The need to obtain this knowledge is made all the more 
important and, indeed, relatively urgent by the knowledge that our 
super reserves are unlikely to last more than 40 years. If precise 
scientific knowledge made it possible to maintain our productivity 
with smaller quantities of super then, despite the increased growth 
of improved pasture, our reserves might last much longer and this
would certainly be in the national interest. This shows how it 
is possible to follow through knowledge gained by the Bureau of 
Agricultural Economics and see how this can direct our research 
activities into certain particular fields to the great advantage 
of the Australian farmer.

