<!--start metadata-->
Title: ABC television programme "Four Corners" and the RSL
Description: press statement
Date: 22/09/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                              PRESS STATEMENT:

                              MALCOLM FRASER!

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  September 24&,1963

                                                                                                                                           A.B.C. TETFVISION PROGRAM

                                                                                                                             "FOUR CORNETT" AND THE R.S.L.


                                                                                                 (rer the last two weeks, a national controversy has raged 
                            concerning the R.S.L. and the Australian Broadcasting Commission. I 
                            thought it may be interesting to survey what has happened because there 
                            may be many people who have been aware of the controversy without having 
                            seen the program.,

                                                                                                 At the moment, I have a script in front of me which 
                            records what was said. However, I want to point out at the outset that 
                            this script is a strictly edited one. People were interviewed for the 
                            program who did not appear on the program and the remarks of Sir Raymond 
                            Huish were cut. His full remarks did not appear. I have tried to obtain 
                            a copy of the full program before the editing but have not been able to do
•                           so,

                                                                                                 There were three main critics of the R.S.L. on the program. 
                            The first of these was Mr. Gawne who recalled that, as a child, he would 
                            dodge an R.S.L. badge because he did not want the "beery sentimentality" 
                            that would be thrown at him, He said: "Young people are not impressed 
                            by the R.S.L. and why should they be?"

                         who claimed that the R.S.L. is ready to give up the civil liberties for The next major critic was a University student, Mr. Welenski,
                         which its members fought during the scar.

                                                                                              After Mr, Welenski, the A.B.C. excelled itself by inter- 
                         viewing Alec. Robertson, Communist Editor of the "Tribune", who was 
                         expelled from the R.S.L. when the R.S.L. removed all Communists from its 
                         ranks. Anyone could imagine what Mr. Robertson said. He was given 
                         three or four minutes' uninterrupted time to make his points.

                                                                                              Mr. Ashbolt appeared to introduce these three critics and,
411                      in some sense, to sum up the remarks in a manner that emphasised and high- 
                         lignted the criticisms.

                                                                                              Mr. Ashbolt then took the program to an R.S.L. Club Room 
                         at Caulfield and spoke to people who were obviously sincere members of 
                         the League. They described the main purpose of the R.S.L. as mainten- 
                         ance of comradeship and assistance to other members who have been less 
                         fortunate than themselves. They were only given the briefest opportun- 
                         ity to make this point. Then Mr, Ashbolt says - "But whatever the 
                         R.S.L. means to these men, the younger generation has a different view 
                         reflected by the Copenhagen downstairs review in Sydney's King's Cross," 
                         This was a serious introduction to a skit that would have had any 
                         member of the R.S.L. laughing at an annual Smoko Night but which, as a 
                         serious interpretation of how people regard the R.S.L. was disgraceful 
                         and shameful. It, perhaps, typifies the program, that Mr. Ashbolt had 
                         to go into a wine cellar in Sydney's King's Cross to get what the A.B.C. 
                         and Mr. Ashbolt appear to regard as a serious young peoples' view of the 
                         R.S.L.

                                                                                              The two people on the program who tried to speak for the 
                         R.S.L. in a positive fashion were the Deputy President of the League, 
                         Sir Raymond Huish, and Mr. Swartz, Minister for Repatriation, who, in 
                         his own right, is also a prominent member of the R.S.L. Both Sir


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /2

                                   — 2 —

    Raymond and hr. Swartz were closely cross-questioned by Mr. Ashbolt who 
    tried to elicit points of view from them that would be unfavourable to 
    the R.S.L. He appeared to want Mr. Swartz to admit that the R.S.L. 
    had an illicit and unreasonable influence on the Government and Sir 
    Raymond Huish to say that the R.S.L. was playing party politics. Sir 
    Raymondts remarks at this point were strictly edited. Everything he 
    said did not appear on the program.

                 It is worth contrasting Mr. Ashbolt's interrogation of these 
    two people with the unrestricted and uninterrupted time given to the 
    critics — Mr. Gawre, Mr. Welenski. and Alec. Robertson, the Communist. 
    In doing this, Mr,, Ashbolt has violated one of the cardinal rules of 
    constructive criticism. If a means of public communication such as 
    A.B.C. television is used by people to attack an organization such as 
    the R.S.L., then the person managing the program, in fairness, should 
    make sure that the critics, the attackers, are also closely questioned
    and interrogated. This was not done. The R.S.L. was attacked. Its 
    advocates were closely interrogated, but the critics of the R.S.L. YE.re 
    neither attacked nor questioned. They were allowed to make their points 
    without interruption. No responsible member of the Australian press 
•   would conduct ar important interview in this fashion.. Such a powerful 
    medium of publicity as is provided by the A.B.C. in every State and in 
    nearly every city demands a greater responsibility than is revealed on 
    this program.

                 There is an:ther test that can be applied to this particular 
    program, that is the test of space given to the different people. The 
    R.S.L., over the years, has spent hundreds of thousands of pounds, 
    probably millions, since the last war, on welfare. These activities 
    of the R.S.L. are most important but they received little attention on 
    the program. The three major critics of the R.S.L., together with the 
    skit from the King's Cross wine cellar were given, I think, more than 
    twice the space allowed Sir Raymond Huish and Mr. Swartz. In addition, 
    the management of the program by Mr. Ashbolt and some of the remarks 
    made by nim would appear to make it reasonable to class m with the 
    critics.

                 Frankly, the A.B.C. should be ashamed of this program.

•                There remain only two points I want to make. The program 
    was introduced by Gerald Lyons who, later, was reported as disassociating 
    himself from the program because he had nothing to do with its construction 
    and was concerned about his professional reputation. Secondly, the A.B.C. 
    is independent of the Government and has not been directed by the Government 
    over this program, The Government has given it no instructions as a result 
    of this program,

