<!--start metadata-->
Title: International affairs, South-East Asia and Communism
Description: press statement
Date: 1/11/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PFt3?S STAT iNT                                   November 1st 1959
MALCUI+4 P
               In the last few years .ustralians have p ld much more 
attention than they once did to international affairs. There are many 
reaaona for this, but the chief of them is probably the result of modern
scientific discovery which has caused the whole world to shrink in size. 
Once it was possible for different countries to live their lives in 
isolation from other countries. This is no longer possible; people of 
different countries will destroy themselves or survive as one people 
belonging to one world.
                 The last six weeks have been particularly interesting
ones because kr. Krushchev, the 3oviet Leader, has apparently shown a great 
willingness to try and get along with the West. The starting point in 
this change could be said to be his visit to the United 6tates and 
President Eisenhower, and more specifically his speech to the United
Nations concerning disarmament. Mr. Kruehchev's speech on this 
occasion differed in one or two important respects from his previous 
statements. Earlier he had centred on nuclear disarmament leaving the 
question and problem relating to disarmament of conventional weapons 
until last. This would have helped the Russians because of their 
vastly superior manpower resources; even today their conventional weapons 
and arms are much greater than those of the west.
                 The essence of Er. Kruehchev's statement provided that
over a period of four years all military establishments of every kind, 
both conventional and nuclear, should be abolished; that individual 
countries should keep under their own control only such forces as are 
necessary for their internal security and although he did not say it, 
he implied that the United Nations should be axed so that it would be 
able to make sure that no one country would be able to violate the 
general disarmament. The plan, as stated by Mr. K ushchev, seems to 
be a comprehensive one but he only spoke in generalities, and he left 
many problems and details unsolved in people's minds.
                 The actual proposals that he put forward are not 
unlike those for which Britain has been patiently working for a very 
long time. Such is the force of lr. Kruehchev' a propaganda that few 
people realise that the British foreign Minister put forward almost
identical proposals six weeks earlier, but there was a significant.

                                2
difference. The British proposals stress the need for inspection and 
supervision. On this question of disarmament we cannot leave it to 
the ruler e of the different countries to say "we have disarmed- we 
have done what we should do." There must be strict supervision so
that there is no possibility of any evasion. 4hen we consider that 
half a dozen nuclear bombs do not take a great deal of room and could 
be relatively easily hidden, and when we consider the damage that these 
bombs could do, we must realise how difficult adequate supervision will
be
      If anyone is prepared to look through the history of the problem 
of disarmament since the war they will find that time and time main 
proposals for disarmament have foundered on this question of superviaion; 
supervision which hitherto the Soviet countries have been completely 
unwiulin to accept. Despite this it is vital that the United 
Nations Ten Member Disarmament Committee examine ?ix'. Xrushchev's 
proposals sincerely and thoroughly.
       There is some evidence to think that Russia may now be more 
prepared to be reasonable on the question of superviaion than she has 
been in the past. Russia quite clearly wishes to remain the leader of 
all the Communist countries; the does not want to be challe ed by 
Communist China. Already in the last few months we have seen China 
going her own aggressive way in u manner that has done much to des'y 
the effect of Russia's peace offensive.
        I am sure it waa no part of kr. Erualichev's plans that China 
should choose this particular time to antagonise India and suppress 
Tibet's independence. Indeed, Russia has spent decades trying to 
impress upon the Indians hew friendly the Russians are, and in a matter 
of weeks the Chinese have undone everything that Russia had tried to do. 
Iwould not be at all surprised if Russia would like to see the world 
an ordered and peaceful place where the danger of large scale war has 
been ruled out before China builds up the industrial strength to 
challenge Russia's own power. There is no doubt that as time passes 
Chine, with 600 million people increasing at the rate of 15 million a 
year, would be able to overwhelm Russia's 200 million.
         Russia may well be forced to come to an agreement with the

               ISO


Wes t on disarmament on terms that are satisfactory and that 
give safeguards to our freedom while she herself can still 
dominate China. If the fear of large scale war can be 
abolished then there is no excuse for the Chinese to continue 
building up her own arms and forces at the present rate. It 
is a strange paradox that Russia's fear of her own Communist 
partner should drive her into agreement with the !eat on some 
outstanding issues, but this may well prove to be the fact 
if the West can find the initiative and the intelligence to 
exploit Russia's fear.

