<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor Party organisation
Description: press statement
Date: 5/05/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


~

        PRESS STATEMENT : 

        MALCOLM FRASER :


                                                                Nny 5th, 1963



                                  PARTY ORGANIZATION


                        Recent debates in the Commonwealth Parliament have shown 
        up the importance of Party political organization and of the power that 
        outside organizations can have over members of Parliament. Today, I want 
        to set down firmly and clearly the differences between the Liberal Party and 
        the Labour Party in these matters.


                        All political Parties have a common base of Branches
        spread throughout the community. Branches elect delegates that go 
        periodically to State Conferences and these State Conferences formulate 
        policies and rules for the guidance and conduct of their political 
        organizations in the different. States. So far as this is concerned, 
        there is some common ground between the two Parties. The essential 
        difference occurs in the relationship between the Liberal Party organization 
        and its members of Parliament and the Labour Party organization and its 
        members.


                        For example, the Federal organs of the Liberal Party, 
~       which are composed of representatives of the State organizations, have 
        a duty to advise Liberal Party members or hinisters on any matters that
        they think fit.  The important word is, of course, "advise". Advice 
        can always be given and there is an obligation to consider it but having 
        considered it, members may reject it.


                        This word is used deliberately because the Liberal 
        Party recognises that members of Parliament are responsible first of 
        all to the Parliamentary institutions and through Parliament to the 
        people of Australia. In a true democracy, nothing should come between 
        members and the people, This relationship is supported by all political 
        Parties in the United Kingdom, including the United Kingdom Labour Party.


                        It is worth noting the words pf Herbert Morrison, a 
        noted Labour Party Leader of the war-time era, and of Mr. Attleets post- 
        war. Government. He is a person who has the respect of political friends 
        and political opponents.


                        Speaking of the relationship in the United Kingdom of 
        the Cabinet and its Labour Party supporters and of the Cabinet and the 
        Labour Party organization outside Parliament he said:-


                        "Neither the Party Executive nor the Party
                         Conference claims the right to instruct a Labour 
                         Government while it is in office. Nor is there 
                         anything in the Party Constitution giving the 
                         Conference or the Executive power to instruct the 
                         Parliamentary Labour Party when in opposition."


        A few lines further on he continued:-


                        "The British people expect from their M.P.'s a 
                        general sense of electoral responsibility nad 
                        that their Government shall be answerable to the 
                        elected House of Commons.


                        In Communist countries things are very different. 
                        There the Political Bureau ( or whatever new title 
                        it may have) of the Communist Party is, in fact, 
                        the body that determines Government policy. If 
                        in our own country committees of political_parties 
                        could instruct the Government of the day, we should 
                        be losing our system of parliamentary democracy and 
                        moving towards single-party dictatorship,"

•

                                  - 2 -

                     These are words which we should not toss lightly aside. 
      In Australia, the Labour Party Parliamentary members are subject to pre- 
      cisely this kind of outside instruction from a largely unknown political 
      committee of the Australian Labour Party. The supreme policy making and 
      governing bodies of the Australian Labour Party under their own rules are, 
      firstly, the Federal Conference of 36 members and, secondly, the Federal 
      Executive of 12 members. Both these bodies have the authority and the 
      right to instruct:Australian Labour Party members of Parliament and such 
      instructions, under the rules, are binding on the members of Parliament.

                     It is easily seen therefore that there are two bodies 
      outside the Parliament that owe no responsibility to the Parliament or to 
      the electors of Australia, both of which can and have told Australian 
      Labour Party members what they should do..

                     It is worth weighing this position with the words of 
      the British Labour Leader, Mr. Herbert Morrison.

                     On a matter that is vitally important to Australia's 
      future - on the question of our relationship with the United States over 
      defensive arrangements, we have seen the present Leader of the Labour 
      Party asking for a special Conference to be called and asking for 
      instructions as to what should be Labour Party policy. This is not a 
      way national leaders should act.

                     We should recall that the Australian Labour Party 
      Conference supported the Radio Communications Centre at Western Australia 
      by only one person - nineteen to seventeen. If one of the unknown 
      members of this Conference changes his mind, Australian Labour Party 
      policy on this vital question could be altered because a drawn vote is 
      a negative under the rules. That vote would not be cast by somebody in 
      Parliament. It would not be cast by Mr. Calwell, the Leader of the
      Opposition.  It would be cast by a person of whom few Australians have 
      ever heard.

                     This procedure represents the very denial of democracy. 
      The whole principle on which our system is built is that members shall 
      be elected by the people to Parliarent to execute their own judgment so 
      that they may act in the nation's best interests. They shall be re- 
      sponsible to the people who elect them and to the Nation as a whole. 
      The people are their judges.

                     Our political opponents do not work like that. They 
      are sent to Parliament by Australians voting in general elections. 
      Then, within the rules laid down by the Party Conference which most 
      Australians hare never heard co', they must do what the Party Conference 
      tells them. Under present circumstances, electing Australian Labour 
      Party members to power would be equivalent to placing the power of 
      control of the nation in the hands of the Australian Lr''eour Party Conference 
      of 36 silent, nameless men unknown by and not responsible to the Australian 
      people.

                     These rules are not so important when you have a strong 
      Parliamentary Leader who is prepared to emphasise and fight for the 
      rights of Parliament against the power of the outside organization. 
      When you have a weak Parliamentary Leader who is not prepared to make 
      his stand and who has shown a Willingness to go to the outside body to 
      take orders then you have distortion and corruption of democracy.

                     The only fortunate matter arising out of these recent 
      happenings is that Australians have been shown Nr. Calwellts weakness 
      while he is in Opposition and cannot basically affect Lustraliats policies. 
      Australian democracy, however, tragically needs an Australian Labour Party 
      Leader prepared to support the authority of the Parliamentary Party against 
      outside control.


                                   o0ó-•----

