<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary procedure
Description: press statement
Date: 16/07/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   PRESS STATEMENT
                                                          July 16th,1961
                                     PARLIAMENTARY P.00F11URE

                           Sometimes you hear that Parliament has sat very late in 
                   the morning - 'til four or five o'clock. All politicians 
                   basically agree that this should not occur, but Parliament is an 
                   unpredictible place - there you can never be entirely sure as 
                   to what is going to happen.
                           When the Government wishes to pass a Bill through 
                   Parliament the Leader of the Government in the House approaches 
                   the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and asks the Deputy Leader, 
                   who is Gough Whitlam, `how long will your Party want to debate 
                   this Bill?" They might come to an agreement in which they
                   believe five hours or six hours would be sufficient. However, 
                   half way through the debate you might find that a member of the 
                   Government or a member of the Opposition has been unduly 
                   provocative, and has stirred many other members who then wish 
                   to speak on the debate.
                           Furthermore, it sometimes happens that the backbench 
••                 members of the Opposition feel that not enough time has been 
                   allowed for a certain debate even though an agreement was
                   reached between the Leaders of the Opposition and the Government
                   Leader in the House regarding a certain measure. when this 
                   occurs the backbench members of the Opposition seem to take 
                   the leadership of the Opposition into their own hands and out 
                   of the hands of the front-bench members of the Opposition. 
                   This has happened much more since Dr. r'vatt retired from active
                   politics.   He seemed to wield a discipline over his supporters 
                   which is no longer present.
                           When this sort of situation arises various members of 
                   the Opposition often call for a division on the most trivial
 •                 and minor sections of the Bill.  I remember one occasion when 
                   a vote was taken last Session when the Opposition demanded a 
                   vote on the title of the Bill even 'though it was an amending 
                   Bill and the title was not changed from the major Bill. This 
                   does nothing but waste time because in all a division takes 
                   about six minutes, and if you are looking for divisions on 
                   every possible matter it is often possible to have continuous
                   divisions with no business being accomplished. There was an 
                   occasion in the last Parliament when a Labour member - Ali 
                   Harrison - was wanting to speak. He was leading the debate 
                   for the Opposition on a measure which the Opposition was going
                   to oppose.   The Chairman who was in charge of the House
                   called kir. Harrison to speak seven times. Mr. Harrison, a 
                   Labour Party member for New South Wales, and one who has a 
                   knowledge on industrial matters, was interrupted twelve times 
                   by members of his own Party who tried to move various points
                   of order and thus prevented the debate taking place. I give 
                   this example because this is the kind of behavious which
                   sometimes compels the Government to use the gag or the guillotine,

                                              2

                     and it is the sort of behaviour that leads to a late Session. 
                               During the day Ministers are constantly on duty in 
                     the House itself, or in their offices adjacent to the House,
                     carrying on their Departmental duties. You will also find 
                     members constantly knocking on the doors of the Ministers' 
                     offices to try to exert an influence in policy or to see the 
                     Minister about an electoral matter that has been brought to
                     the member's notice.  This is an important part of a private 
                     member's work, and it's one that also necessarily entails a 
                     great deal of Ministerial time.
                               One of the great advantages of staying in Canberra 
                     for the Session as ï do, is that on the days when Parliament 
                     is not sitting I am able to contact senior Departmental
                     Officers and discuss any matters that are current at the
                     present time.  This might be in relation to an electoral 
                     matter, the establishment of a new automatic exchange, or it 
                     could be for the purpose of getting as much information as 
                     possible on major international issues, such as the last 
~•                   Prime Ministers' Conference during which South Africa withdrew. 
                     It may be to gain a better understanding of the happenings 
                     in South East Asia, and of the strange alliances and civil 
                     wars of countries such as Laos.
                                I believe this to be a most important part of a 
                     member's duties because, quite frankly, if you are travelling 
                     backwards and forwards all the time you just haven't time to be 
                     as fully informed as you should be on matters that vitally
                     affect the future of this country. If a member is to be 
                     effective in the Parliament he can only be effective if his 
                     information and knowledge of the particular subject are good.
                                 The days in Canberra when Parliament is not 
 •                   sitting also _.lakes it possible to carry out a detailed study 
                     of important legislation which comes before Parliament.
                     This, again, is something that just can't be done in a short
                     space of time, and it can't be none effectively during the 
                     days in Canberra when Parliament is sitting because the
                     actual business of Parliament itself absorbs your time.
                                 Q,uite frankly, the way the House conducts its 
                     business is, in some respects, a hangover from the past. The 
                     business of the House is still arranged very largely to suit 
                     the convenience of members who come from capital cities, 
                     especially the nearby cities of Melbourne and Sydney. These 
                     people are very often, by modern air transport, only about
                     one hour from their home.  Even the Adelaide and Brisbane 
                     members, by direct 'plane, can get home fairly quickly. 
                     The country member, even if it is in Victoria or N.S.'rv., but 
                     particularly in ccueensland and West Australia, is at a great 
                     disadvantage because of the inordinate amount of time which
                     they spend travelling backwards and forwards each week. I 
                     am quite convinced that this travelling reduces the effectiveness

                                                3     -
                     of a member of Parliament, and it is worth noting that other 
                     countries with large areas such as Australia conduct their 
                     Parliamentary business to a different time schedule.
                              In the United States their Congress sits five days a 
                     week, and it sits for sensible hours - the Session stops each
                     day at 5.30 p.m. or 6.00 p.m.     There are, I understand, 
                     Committee meetings after dinner but these are at the discretion
                     of members.    There are no late Sessions which tend to get on
                     everyone's nerves.    In the United :states members of the House 
                     of Representatives or the Senate are encouraged to establish 
                     a second home in the capital, because it is recognised that 
                     this makes it possible for them to conduct their business more
                     effectively.    Over the years I believe the same course will
                     come to be adopted in Australia.     More members would establish 
                     a place at Canberra in which they could take their families 
                     when Parliament is sitting if they could afford it, and if 
                     there were more young members in the Parliament the stimulus
                     to do this would be even greater.     As it is the families of 
~•                   most members have grown up and homelife becomes less vital 
                     than it is with a member with young children.
                              H member whose family has grown up and departed to lead 
                     their own lives, and these represent a great majority of the 
                     members, is in quite a different position from a member with 
                     a very young family, and such members are in a very small 
                     minority.
                              On a clear question of expense this business of trans- 
                     porting members backwards and forwards each week - either to 
                     the capital city or to more remote parts is a most expensive 
                     one. To take an extreme example - if a member went back to 
                     Perth each weekend, which he is entitled to do - this would 
 •                   cost the Commonwealth in the vicinity of £2,000 a year, and 
                     this transport is, of course, just for the weeks when Parliament
                     is sitting.    It would be cheaper from the Commonwealth's 
                     point of view to rent homes to such a member at the normal 
                     rental and encourage a member to establish a second home at 
                     Canberra for the time Parliament is sitting rather than spend
                     £2,000 each year and every year in air fares.      After all, 
                     the house in Canberra, if it was built by the Commonwealth, 
                     would be a permanent investment and would draw a permanent 
                     income from whoever was the member.
                              This is the kind of thing I believe will occur in the 
                     future. It does not mean that a member's effectiveness on 
                     behalf of his electors is reduced. On the other hand, I 
                     firmly believe his effectiveness by staying in Canberra during
                     the Session is very greatly increased.     This is because he 
                     can get to know leading members of the Civil Service much 
                     more intimately than he would otherwise, and he can therefore 
                     argue more effectively on behalf of his constituents. Of

                         4 -
course, if a member does do this it is essential to get about 
all the more during the recesses so that as great a contact as 
possible is maintained with his electorate.
         I thought some of you might be interested in this 
article because Australians should certainly know what the 
bulk of their politicians do when they are in Canberra. I 
only wish more people came to Canberra to see the city for 
themselves and to have a look at Parliament while it is in
Session.  It is worth..noting that a very good holiday of ten 
Gays to a fortnight can be had by going to Canberra at the 
right time and going on to the Snowy Mountains to see the great
works that have been carried out. The attendants at 
Parliament House who show visitors around the building showed 
130,000 visitors around last year, and the number is increasing 
each year, so you can see the place has an attraction for quite 
a number of people.

