<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry re-organisation
Description: press statement
Date: 9/12/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEiENT:

i•1-1 1,C OLi~ i F 13ASL R:

                                                      December 9th,1962

                     WOOL II,NDUSTRY RE-ORGANIZATION

               Last week, the Minister for Primary Industry, 1.1.. Adermann, 
introduced the Wool Industry Bill into the House of Representatives. This 
is the most important piece of legislation ever introduced into any
Australian Parliament affecting the wool industry.

               The Wool Industry Bill is the culmination of efforts begun 
about 3 years ago to try and bring unity into the wool industry. Because 
Wool Industry Organizations were unable to agree on the vital subject of 
wool marketing, they jointly asked the Commonwealth to establish the Wool
 arketing Committee of Enquiry.   This Committee took much evidence. One 
of its most important recommendations was that an overall authority should 
be established to manage the affairs of the industry.

               Up to the present time, the wool industry has been in a
relatively chaotic state.   The growers, brokers and buyers have not been
co-ordinated and, at times, have worked without harmony.  The growers, whose 
product was involved, had little control over their industry after the wool 
was taken from the sheeps' back. He had some remote control through the Wool 
Bureau and the Wool Research Committee but these bodies were unco-ordinated and 
were working independently of each other.

               The Committee of Enquiry believed that one authority should have 
control of the industry and that the growers should control that authority. 
It put forward recommendations which would bring the Wool Bureau (responsible
for promotion), and the Wool Research Committee under one authority.  The 
Committee of Enquiry also suggested that there should be a marketing Committee 
to watch constantly the auction system and to examine alternative systems and 
to recommend their int roduction if the Committee thought proper.

               The Woolgrower Organizations examined these proposals earlier 
this year and in the beginning of the Spring session of Parliament, much 
earlier than some people had forecast, an agreement was completed between the 
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation and the Australian Woolgrowers'
and Graziers' Council.    They came to the Government with joint proposals 
for an organization that would control the industry. The Wool Industry Bill 
gives effect to these proposals.

              There will be a Wool Industry Conference, which is a non- 
statutory body, established by the Australian Wool & Meat Producers' Federation
and. the Australian Woolgrowers' & Graziers' Council. It consists of 50 
members, 25 from each Organization. Its main functions will be to nominate 
woolgrower representatives to the Wool Board; to consult with the Minister 
concerning the appointment of non-grower members to the Board; to recommend 
the maximum rate of levy to be collected from woolgrowers to finance the 
activities of the Wool Board; to recommend the operative rate of levy to be 
struck; to consult with the hinister concerning the appointment of the first 
Chairman of the Board and to consult with the Wool Board in respect to the 
activities of the Board.

              This is a non-statutory body established by these two
Organizations.  It will become the national forum for woolgrowers in '-Australia.

              While the establishment of this Conference represents a marked
step forward, it has one grave weakness.  The A.P.P.U. is not included in 
the membership of the Conference despite the most vigorous discussions between 
the Government, private members of Parliament and the industry leaders. This 
is a matter of vital concern and I will deal with it later. I will continue 
to describe the statutory bodies established by this new Bill.


                                                                /2.

                                      2




                The Australian Wool Board will be the overall governing 
authority responsible to the Wool Conference for the present activities of 
the Wool Bureau, the Wool Research Committee and the Wool Testing Authority. 
 In addition, the legislation makes it mandatory for this Wool Board to 
 establish a Wool Marketing Committee to enquire into the auction system and 
to recommend any changes that it thinks desirable and to report to the Wool
Board.     The research activities of the Wool Board will be carried out by 
two Research Committees, one to specialise in production research and the 
other in textile research.

                The legislation does not lay down how the Wool Board should 
carry out its promotion activities. This will be left to the discretion of 
the Wool Board as a whole. The Wool Board will have control over any 
Committees that it may establish.

                On the Board there will be six woolgrowers appointed from the 
Wool Conference, a Chairman, a Government representative and three others 
appointed by the Minister from a panel put forward by the Wool Conference. 
The Wool Conference, as the governing body, will have over-riding control over 
the Wool Board. This makes grower control complete and absolute.

                All woolgrowers will watch the activities of this Marketing 
Committee most keenly. It is significant that the view of many growers has
changed very much in recent years.    For example, within the last two months, 
the Grazierst Association of New South Wales passed resolutions asking this 
Marketing Committee, when established, to examine appraisement schemes with a
view to their introduction.     Three or four years ago, many growers from that 
Organization would have regarded such a request as radical in the extreme. 
Indeed, as a result of arguments that I will develop in the debate in the 
Parliament on this matter, I believe we may find this Marketing Committee 
recommending the abandonment of the auction system entirely.

                If the Marketing Committee comes to the stage when it is ready 
to recommend radical changes in the marketing of the Australian wool clip the 
major organizations have said that they want these recommendations put to a 
ballot of all woolgrowers. So long as such recommendations have the endorse- 
ment of the Wool Board and of the Conference, there will be no doubt that such 
a referendum would be carried.

               For the first time in history, the Wool industry will be placed
in the hands of woolgrowers represented on the Conference.   If all growers 
can work for their desired objectives firstly, through their grower organizations 
and by their agency, through the Conference, we will find the Wool Industry 
emerging from the disorganization of recent years as a powerful, unified voice 
on the Australian scene. Indeed, this voice could become so powerful that it 
may embarrass Governments from time to time but if the Wool Industry does 
achieve this position I, for one, as a politician, would welcome it.

               The Wool Industry is of permanent importance to all Australians, 
not just to woolgrowers, and it deserves a powerful and forceful voice on the 
national stage. Hitherto, it has not had this voice because the Industry 
Organizations have been disunited. Every woolgrower should keep these great 
national objectives in his sights when he is seeking improvements for his
industry.    We should all work through this Organization so that it can be 
strengthened and gain the prestige which it deserves.

               Next week I will talk about the Conference and the negotiations 
that have been undertaken about its members with special reference to membership 
of the A.P.P.U.

