<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam
Description: radio talk
Date: c1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•

                               RADIO TALK

             At the outset of this talk I must express my regret at missing 
   out on the weekly comment in this series last week. There was a.y good
   reason, however. It was because.                  tatiotemanch•:tli t
   M a n +Q„-._:. attr °t         i = t was found necessary to extend the 
   period of the Washington visit not once, but twice, so t4t,th,4e long Anil 
   Yry round of discussions could be completed. The Mission='finally arrived 
   back in Australia last Friday morning after having been away since Easter 
   Monday.
             I think it might be the best approach if I reported on my
   discussions as they unfolded '                            ry"'"it° was
   n             gib.
             There was an overnight stop at Singapore, and this permitted a 
   brief but helpful talk with senior Government representatives. My visit 
   to Vietnam was my first as Minister for Defence, and there I was accompanied 
   by the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, Genera]. Sir John Wilton 
   and senior Defence officials./Since our visit, President Nixon has announced 
   the proposed withdrawal of 150,000 U.S. troops over the next twelve months 
   and Prime Minister John Gorton during the week told Parliament that the 
   Government had decided that one Australian infantry battalion and some 
   supporting personnel would be withdrawn from South Vietnam. This would be 
   done by withdrawing, without replacement, the 8th Battalion of the Royal 
   Australian. Regiment, which was scheduled to complete its tour of duty next 
   November. The Government was examining further ways in which it could 
   contribute to the growth in South Vietnamese self—reliance, and a number of 
   small mobile Army teams, totalling some 130 men, would be provided to work 
   with the regional and popular forces in Phuoc Tuy. The teams would operate 
   on a pattern similar to that developed by some members of the existing 
   Australian Army Advisory Group, which would continue its work. We were 
   also developing a further proposal that Australia would provide instructors 
   and other assistance to a South Vietnamese training centre for junior 
   leaders of the popular and regional forces. It was planned to establish 
   this centre on the site to be vacated by the Australian battalion 4e—bas
   w    ar. It was proposed that the courses at this centre, to accommodate 
   between 400 and 500 students, would place particular emphasis in instruction 
   methods of jungle warfare which had been developed by Australian forces. 
   Cabinet was also giving urgent attention to the results of comprehensive 
   studies now being made of other forms of assistance which might be offered 
   to South Vietnam.
             In Saigon I had discussed the matter of troop withdrawals with 
   South Vietnamese leaders, our own people and with General Abrams, the
   U.S. Commander, and Ambassador Bunker of the U.S. President Thieu understood

                                    2.

and accepted the Australian position, and the talks I had with him were
rewar Iag-Erí-ar 61 much hèl 
          I was glad to be able to fly by helicopter     to the Australian 
Task Force headquarters at Nui Dat and to visit some other posts to get a 
first—hand impression of how things were going with our own troops in 
Phuoc Tuy Province. I found a good spirit prevailing and a will to 01, on
with the j ob,af,...                 I                      inspecti rg some 
of the valuable civic action work done by the Australian force, including
the start of a re—building plan for a village market—place.    The scene 
here was now one of industry, with busy buffalo—drawn and motorised transport 
moving about, and people going about their work in reasonable safety.
          At Vung Tau I inspected the hospital facilities and was greatly 
impressed with the standard of these and the concern of all those for the 
welfare of the wounded and the ill. While I was there I saw a North 
Vietnamese patient, an officer who had been wounded during his capture by 
our troops the day before in one of the Australian. posts. This officer
was receiving the very best of medical attention available             e 
                       tfve --
          In discussions with President Thieu, Vietnamese military leaders, 
General Abrams and our own people, I was thoroughly briefed on the progress 
of the war, on Vietnamisation and the pacification program. I obtained 
an appreciation of the progress made by the South Vietnamese forces in 
recent months. On the advice given me, I felt that a reasonably good 
situation existed in Phuoc Tuy Province. I discussed with the South 
Vietnamese leaders the possibilities for increased Australian assistance 
in the further development of the security forces of the Republic (a 
matter I earlier referred to in part of the Prime Minister's announcement). 
The Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, General Sir John Wilton, 
had further discussions in detail in Saigon at the military level on this 
matter. The South Vietnamese had always expressed a high regard for the
tactical doctrines and practices used by the Australian Army and a desire 
to see these made available to the South Vietnamese forces.
          On the advice given me, the process of Vietnamisation was 
proceeding efficiently. The South Vietnamese forces have been accepting 
greater and greater responsibility, and I am inf med, the performance
of their troops has been good. We wo           to see our mission 
successfully accomplished in South Vietnam, and to achieve a situation 
in which the South Vietnamese were left to work out their own future without 
interference and without fear.

