<!--start metadata-->
Title: Small business, economy
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 7/09/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    L;ADER OF THE OPPOSITION    FOR SUNDAY SEPTEMBER 7TH
                                AND THURSDAY 11TH


                ELECTORAL TALK


    The alarming circumstances of small business firms around
    Australia have begun to find their way into the record as statistics.

    The big firms make the big headlines and over the last few days 
    major companies like CRA, Mount Isa Mines, Peko Wallsend and 
    BHP have been reporting their difficulties.

    In the first half of this year, CRA's profit fell 65%.

    Over the full year to June 30th Mount Isa's profit fell 44%. 
    Peko Walisend's profit fell 40% while BHP talks gloomily of the 
    outlook during the present year, brought about by the slump in 
    demand for steel products.

    But the big companies have got big reserves.

    CRA, BHP, Mount Isa and Peko Walls end will still be around in a 
    year of 18 months.

    But what about the small firms.
•   So far this year it is estimated that at least 3,000 Australian 
    business firms have had to close down.

    In Victoria, 1,179 companies have been removed from the Corporate 
    Affairs Register, and in New South Wales 878 companies have been 
    wound up.

    In Queensland 719 companies have been forced to close.

    They have been caught in a squeeze between rising costs, industrial 
    disputes, shortage of finance and falling revenue that is too much 
    for the,.. to bear.

                        2                               c

Clothing manufacturers, real estate firms; builders, retailers,
farmers are all suffering. Shopkeepers cannot raise the cash 
to replace the stock on their shelves.

Farmers cannot sell their cattle for enough money to cover the 
cost of getting them to market, and land developers and builders 
can no longer finance their projects.

Yet, small businesses are the backbone of the private sector.

90%- of these firms _employ fewer than 20 people and 9S-employ 
fewer than 100, yet between them they employ 42% of the workforce.

Thus the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians are in 
jeopardy.

Voluntary bankruptcies amongst small firms have grown at an 
alarming rate-,particularly in the last few reeks.

In New South Wales, the number of companies going into liquidation 
this 'year is up 30% on -last-year, which was- up 9.a on. the-year_ 
before.

The Associated_ Chambers of Manufacturers of Australia believes 
that two thirds of Australia's 25.0,000 small businesses are in 
danger of collapse, under the twin pressures of rising wages and • 
an inadequate return on funds.

These firms comprise 97% of manufacturing, 99% of retailing, _ 
97% of wholesaling and. 991 of real-- estate and business services.

And they employ hbdut 4 persons in every 10.

Small businesses are really Australia's biggest business.

They.. have been battered by centralised government and ignored 
in the last Budget.

                                - Z -


       The innovative drive of an important sector of the community 
       is being destroyed.

       Competition in primary, secondary and tertiary manufacture 
       is being destroyed.

       Prosperity and jobs are being destroyed.

       For three years we have had a government which beat the 
       nationalist drum and which condemned foreign investment and 
       the dreaded multi-national corporations.

       But the Federal Government's economic mismanagement is playing
•      the major role in clearing the field for these same foreign 
       companies.

       They have the financial strength to survive where the small 
       local entrepreneur has not.

       The Liberal Party surveyed 250 small firms in the Dandenong
       district of Victoria.  It found they employed almost 40% 
       of the local workforce and that they were responsible for 
       40% of the total output.

       Almost half, some 43%, were contemplating closing down unless
•      the economic climate improves.

       Throughout Australia small firms are on trial for their lives.
       The 1975 Budget has failed the challenge. The 21/2% reduction
       in company tax is derisory,

       It does not tackle the problem of crippling taxation, excessive 
       wage increases and the lack of financial liquidity.

        ''hat is needed is drastic reform in taxation systems so 'that 
       the effect of inflation is taken into account.

What is needed is a sharp direct stimulus to investment to 
encoúrage these firms to keep people in work.

That is what we would have done if we had had the opportunity 
and that is what we are offering the people of Australia.








                           •











                           •

