<!--start metadata-->
Title: Concern in farm communities
Description: For press
Date: c1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR PRESS

         CONCERN IN FARM COMMUNITIES

    Many rural communities held a deep—seated concern for
their future, the Minister for Defence and Member for Wannon (Vic.)
Mr Malcolm Fraser said today.
    A wider understanding and acceptance of rural problems
needed to be achieved, he told a regional convention. of the Liberal.
and Country League at Millicent (S.A.).
    Represented were branches from Albert, Millicent, Mount
Gambier and Victorian districts.
    Mr Fraser said he took every opportunity he could to bring
to the notice of people outside the industry the growing problems of
rural producers.
    While there had been a mining boom and economic progress
generally, there were areas bypassed because of pressures generated
by the pace of development and the continuing round of wage increases.
    The pressure of farm costs imposed by rising wages and
rising prices, coupled with difficult market situ;-,,tions overseas, had
let to great difficulty.
    Aid provided by the Commonwealth had been increased and in
the last budget further measures had been brought down.
    Three main areas of assistance were available to farmers— 
in taxation concessions, investment and depreciation allowances; in
finance; and in subsidies of various kinds.
    Investment and depreciation allowances, coupled with the
farmer's own ingenuity, had helped over the past years in the purchase
of more and better modern rural equipment, and so improved productivity.
    Outst<ndin;' loans to rural producers granted by the
Development Bank totalled $192 million in June last year.
    Term Loan Fund ourstandings to primary producers in July last
year were $127 million and the Farm Development Loan Fund had loans
on issue to $73 million in November last year.
    The superphosphate subsidy, raised in the last budget to $12
a ton, would cost the Commonwealth about $50 million this year.
    Other aid in this field included a nitrogenous fertilizer.

                 2
subsidy costing $15 million this financial year and a bounty on 
tractors costing nearly â7 million in the last three years.
     Direct subsidies to farmers had increased over the past 
five years from about $55 million to about $200 million last 
financial year, said Mr. Fraser.
     The Commonwealth had spent about $80 million in supporting 
wool research and promotion and from July this year the growers' levy 
would be halved and the Government's contribution doubled to a 
maximum of $27 million a year.
     Mr. Fraser said the problems of the wool industry were 
causing particular concern.
     The problems of this industry were among the greatest 
confronting Australia.
     He warned that the causes of the present situation were 
complex, and the solutions were not going to be easy to find.
     Factors influencing the present situation had been of such 
weight that they had more than counteracted the specific measures 
of help to the wool industry.
     There had been a good season, but a dramatic fall had 
occurred in the price of raw wool.
     The situation had now been reached where wool was selling 
at 1948 prices with. 1970 costs.
     Inflation was partly to blame for the cost-price squeeze, 
but was not the main cause.
     Inflation had been contained a good deal more effectively 
in Australia than in a number of countries which purchased large 
quantities of our wool.
     In the search for solutions, some people were asserting that 
matters which had been accepted by the industry for a long time would 
need to be challenged, Mr. Fraser said.
     He recalled when he had himself said in a symposium in 
Brisbane that the auction system made little sense as a modern method 
of marketing.
     Some people were now asking whether the wool industry needed 
to establish the circumstances in which mills could be given the
opportunity to order up to a year's supply of wool at the one time, 
knowing that price they would have to pay for it.

                3

    Some claimed that the wider use of core testing and sale 
by scientific description might well play a significant part in
future developments for the industry.
    In recent times some spokesmen had asked if there were
an independent company established to sell growers' wool by tender, 
by fixed—price arrangement, by scientific description, how many 
growers would be prepared to ask that company — "will you handle my
wool?" °
    If such a company did exist, these spokesmen argued, it
would be of interest to see how many growers knocked on its doors
rather than adhere to the auction system.
    Mr. Fraser said a viable future for the industry was a
major Government objective.
    There would thus be a heavy responsibility not only on the
industry's leaders with whom the Minister for Primary Industry 
negotiated, but also on the Government.

