<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool
Description: press statement
Date: 21/05/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                      11
                                                                                     ....••••••^•^•••^••••••••••
  PRESS STATEMENT -
  MALCOLM FRASER:                                                    MAY 21ST, 1961.



                                         WOOL




          The wool industry received some good news last week.     At a meeting of the

  full Executive of the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation and the Australian 

  Woolgrowers and Graziers Council, an interim agreement was reached regarding the

  promotion levy.    It is true that this agreement has not yet got the full sanction of all 

  members of the organizations, but those who were at the joint meeting have agreed to 

  try to sell the interim agreement to their respective members.


          The interim agreement is in these terms - that the levy should be increased to 

  a total of 12/-, of which 10/- would go to wool promotion, and that the increased levy 

  should be in force for a full year and that it should be collected from the first sale in

  the 1961-62 selling season.    I hope all woolgrowers will support this and regard it as
^••••11111
  a reasonable compromise between differing points of view.


          It is pretty well known that the Graziers' Association had supported the Wool 

  Bureau's plans for an increased levy and that the Wool and Meat Producers' Federation 

  have opposed any increase in levy until organised marketing is introduced.


          The proposal does not give anyone everything they were asking for, but if 

  differing points of view are to be reconciled each side must give way to some extent.

  This is the essence of compromise.      This interim agreement, if accepted by the 

  organisations, is surely sensible because nearly everyone was in agreement that more

  promotion was necessary at some time.      Those who did not regard the matter as 

  urgent wanted full decision left until after publication of the Enquiry's report. Since 

  the interim agreement is only for one year the Organizations and the Wool Bureau will

  be able to re-negotiate the position after the Enquiry's report is published. The great 

  advantage of this interim agreement is that it will enable the International Wool 

  Secretariat to appoint a Director and to begin planning for an all-out effort at world-

  wide promotion.    As I see it this is the purpose of the agreement.


          The agreement also affords evidence that the organization can work together 

  as they did in asking the Government to establish an enquiry, and further that the industry

  has a basic awareness of the need for promotion.    This is essential to the Wool Bureau's 

  efforts to find a man of proper calibre for the top post.


          The sort of person that the Bureau wants would not readily be available unless 

  that person felt that the industry was going to get behind promotion at least after the

  Enquiry has made its report.    This may be assuming the Enquiry's support of promotion, 

  but most people I've spoken to have been prepared to gamble on this.


          It should also be remembered that a new promotion plan will take two years to

  give results.   If nothing were done about promotion until after the results of the Enquiry 

  were known then it would be at the minimum three years from now before we would start

  to see results of anything that would be done.                                 ..... /2

  PRESS STATEMENT -                                                 MAY 21ST, 1961
  MALCOLM FRASER:                                                                 Page 2.


          Like myself some growers may be disappointed that matters cannot move quicker

  than they are.   Regarding the Enquiry, the Presidents of the two Organizations - Mr. 

  Heaslip from the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation and Mr. T. M. Scott 

  of the Graziers' Council - have both indicated that they would not expect the result of 

  the Enquiry to be known before December.


          It is pleasing to see that there is agreement between the Leaders of the two 

  Organizations on this point, because there was originally some hope that it might be

  possible to get the result out before this. Having regard to the importance of the task 

  and the amount of work that has to be done, it is clear that the Committee is doing its

  utmost to see that matters proceed in the shortest possible space of time   Nevertheless,

  I regret it is not possible to have matters finalised for the coming season. There are

  several reasons why this is not possible.   From the time when I first put the suggestion 

of an impartial enquiry to the different Organizations a good six months elapsed before

  the Organizations made their joint approach to the Government.    Then, quite naturally,

  the Commonwealth had to consider the proposal.     It soon agreed to it in principle and

  started looking for adequate personnel.   Unfortunately, the first people approached, as 

  I understand it, were not able to accept because of prior commitments, therefore the 

  Commonwealth had to turn around and look for other people to carry out this task. All

  this meant some delay.     I think the industry and the Commonwealth can both 

  consider themselves lucky that the Commonwealth was able to assemble a Committee 

  of the calibre that it has in a relatively short space of time and that the Committee was

  able to start operations early this year.   Then, when you look at the other end of the 

  picture, after the Enquiry has been tabled you will find that some delay will again be

----inevitable.  The Organizations have said they want to examine the report as has the

  Government.      The Organizations have rightly said that any decision is to be made by a

  ballot of woolgrowers.    Once the ballot is completed the Government would almost 

  certainly have to pass legislation if a decision of growers favoured some kind of 

  organised marketing.


          These things cannot be done overnight, but certain work can be got under way

  to minimise any delay.     That is why last week I asked the Minister for Primary 

  Production, Mr. Adermann, to have work begun on rolls of woolgrowers. I understand 

  this is being done, although woolgrowers themselves have not yet decided on what

  constitutes a woolgrower.    IS Ls a man with one bale, five bales or ten bales of wool? 

  This is something the Organizations should decide quickly.


          If the Enquiry recommends organised marketing; if the Organizations and the 

  growers accept the Committee's report and if there are no insuperable objections from 

  a Governmental point of view, then the objective must be to have any organization in 

  operation before the selling season which will commence in 1962.


          The Enquiry, the Organizations and the Government should direct their full 

  energies to this end.

