<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural reconstruction, industrial safety, scholarships
Description: Radio talk
Date: 5/12/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                     Sunday, 5 December, 1970 - 3HA
RADIO TALK           Thursday, 10 December, 1970 - 3YB

   This will be my final radio talk for this year. The new series of radio 
talks for 1971 will commence at the beginning of the 1971 Parliamentary year.
   This week I would like to talk with you about rural reconstruction 
plans....immigration....industrial safety and scholarships.
   The Commonwealth has proposed to the States that there should be an 
early meeting between Commonwealth and State Ministers to discuss debt 
reconstruction and farm adjustment measures aimed at relieving some of the 
difficulties of the rural industries, but particularly the sheep industry.
   This proposal has been made in telegrams sent by the Prime Minister 
this week to each of the State Premiers.
   My colleagues, the Minister for Primary Industry and the Treasurer will 
represent the Commonwealth at the first meeting, which the Commonwealth 
hoped night take place in Canberra about December the 10th.
   I have referred on a number of occasions to the problems of the rural 
industries, including the problems of long-term finance and farm debt.
   It is obvious that a programme of debt and property adjustment will be 
required to help the rural industries together with retraining and 
rehabilitation programmes, where necessary.
   You will no doubt recall that the Prime Minister has said that the 
Commonwealth will work with the States in developing such measures.
   Following a report by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics on the 
immediate and long-term needs for debt reconstruction and farm adjustment, the 
Bureau and the Department of Primary Industry prepared - for the immediate 
consideration of the Government - proposals for measures to assist in this way.
   The Commonwealth has declared its willingness to cooperate with the 
States in a national programme which should provide for measures of debt 
reconsuction and farm build-up arrangements, as well as assistance where 
necessary to those leaving the industry.
   I have been very conscious that the need of many producers was long- 
term credit and have been giving Doug Anthony my fullest support in his 
proposals to help the primary producer.

  The Government will also be moving as soon as possible to initiate 
discussions with financial institutions on the establishment of a
Finance Insurance Corporation to insure long-term loans to rural producers 
when their circumstances justified it.
  I am very hopeful that the Commonwealth proposals will be of sound 
practical benefit to many in the rural sector, but particularly the woolgrower.
  You can be assured that necessary action based on Government's plans 
are getting the fullest possible support from me.

  Australia this year will benefit to the extent of some 3,000 professionally 
qualified people from overseas.
  The total is expected to cover a wide diversity of skills and
experience in professions such as engineering and teaching, which are in strong 
demand in Australia.
  This immigration flor will be of particular value to Australia at a 
time when world demand for available trade and professional skills is fast 
outstripping supply.
  In the past 10 hears, some 600,000 settlers from overseas have been 
added to the Australian workforce.
  The majority of professionally qualified migrants will come from 
Britain where the question of recognition of qualifications is not a major 
problem.
  The Government is continuing to take steps to ensure that Australia 
attract professionally, technically and trade-trained settlers to meet 
Australia's demands of the 'seventies and beyond.

  In conjunction with State Labour Ministers, a national conference on 
industrial safety will be convened next year.
  The conference will review progress made in the past decade in solving 
problems Of industrial safety and will discuss future action.
  It will involve those who have major responsibility for accident prevention, 
including representatives of Government, trade unions, employers' organisations 
and voluntary bodies.

                  — 3 —
   At present, accidents at work are claiming about 400 lives in
Australia each year, and disabling injuries cause a loss of 700,000 man weeks 
or 3.5—million work days.
   The economic cost to individuals and the nation is great.
   Compensation payments alone amount to more than $100—million each year.
   The Government considers it vital to mnfer with industry on a matter 
which involves great cost to human happiness and waste of human potential 
through avoidable suffering or death.

   It is expected that a total of 23 Advanced Education Scholarships at 
Warrnambool Institute will be awarded for 1971.
   Applicants for these scholarships will be able to mmpete for them on 
two bases — the Victorian Matriculation examination, and an order—of—merit 
for Diploma course students at the Institute.
   The second base is founded on results by a student in the first year o 
a Diploma course at the Institute where the Institute itself draws up an 
order—of—merit list.
   The Melbourne office of the Department of Education and Science rade a 
survey of the State—wide demand for these scholarships and calculated the • 
allocation of awards to-Institutes.
   In round figures, the estimated enrolment for 1970 in approved courses 
at Warrnambool Institute were 80, although the actual enrolment was considerably 
lower.
   Of the 23 scholarships offered in 1970 to Warrnambool Institute, only 
12 were taken up.
   Based on this years experience it is unlikely that there will be any 
substantial changes for 1971.
   Next year the Commonwealth will also Hake available a limited number 
of Australian Agricultural Council scholarships.
   These scholarships are avàilable for undergraduate. courses in the 
faculties of: Agriculture; Rural Science; Veterinary science and 
Agricultural engineering.

•
                     4

     The scholarships are open to matriculants selected for Commonwealth 
  University Scholarships, and the scholarships are not subject to a means test 
  or carry a bond.

     As this is my final broadcast for the year, I would like to wish you 
  all a very Happy Christmas and prosperous New Year. During the holiday break 
  I will be at home at Nareen, and if you have any urgent problems do not 
  hesitate to call me on Tarryoukyan 47. At the same time part of my staff will 
  be on duty in Canberra and can contact me if I am temporarily away from 
  Nareen. A very Merry Christmas to you all.

