<!--start metadata-->
Title: Murphy Croatian affair
Description: Broadcast
Date: 8/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


BROADCAST         SUNDAY, 8TH APRIL 3HA 
                  WEDNESDAY, 11TH APRIL 3LK 
                  THURSDAY, 12TH APRIL, 3YB



This last week saw Senator Greenwood's reply to the irresponsible 
allegations made by the Attorney-General, Senator Murphy. 
It was a good reply. It was also a very long one. There 
has been an enormous amount in the press about the Murphy 
Croatian affair. If there are any of you who have a particular 
interest in this matter, the full Hansard record of the 
Senate debates,where the battle has taken place, are available. 
But there are still many gaps. Despite all the words Senator 
Murphy has not said why he first raided the ASIO Canberra 
headquarters in the darkness of night. He has not let the 
Parliament understand and know why he felt it necessary 
to go immediately to Melbourne with 27 policemen to steal 
the ASIO safes and raid Australia's security organisation.

The Prime Minister has not answered questions put to him 
in the House of Representatives. He has made counter
allegations based on the alleged contents of documents that 
he won't make public. The whole business is a sad and sorry 
affair.

I am certain that all Australians would condemn extremism, 
would condemn any person or group dedicated to violence or 
terrorism. I am certain Senator Greenwood holds that view. 
I am also quite sure that Senator Greenwood has an acute 
concern for civil liberties and for the rights of individuals, 
and believes that in Australia, no-one should be pilloried 
and pursued unjustly, or falsely accused - that if charges 
are to be laid, they ought to be laid before the courts and 
proven in the courts. His devotion to the rights of the 
citizen is a passionate devotion. One part of the test of 
the Government's approach to this matter would be whether or 
not as a result of the raids people are prosecuted, brought 
before the courts, charged and convicted. If there are such 
groups, or if there are such individuals in Australia, I 
certainly hope that happens, and would support it.

                  - 2



But there is still too much mystery about this affair. There 
is mystery about the midnight raids. Why does the Attorney- 
General, supported by the Commonwealth Police, have to raid 
an agency of Government, which from the Senator's own 
admission, had always given all the information that he 
had asked for? Is it part of an approach which will provide 
a background against which the Government can introduce 
substantial changes to ASIO? It ought to be noted that 
Mr. Chifley began the organisation, a Labor Prime Minister. 
He began the organisation by an administrative act as 
Prime Minister. We gave the organisation a parliamentary 
statute which makes it responsible to Parliament, but along 
the same lines as had been initiated by Prime Minister Chifley. 
This story has not yet been played out.

A short while ago, I indicated that reports out of Canberra 
showed that the Government would not support the decisions 
we had earlier made about wool research and promotion. The 
Minister for Primary Industry has now announced that these 
reports were accurate. The levy on the grower is to be 
increased by 70% and the Government's contribution will be 
cut by a third. Instead of providing for a three-year 
commitment, the Government's commitment is for one year 
alone. While there might be people who can suggest that 
because of current wool prices the industry can afford this 
additional charge, we ought to remember the rapidity with 
which wool prices change under certain circumstances. There 
has been a dramatic fall within the last two weeks only 
of over 100 cents a kilo. The decision of the Government will 
clearly have implications for other rural industries depending 
upon Government support for their research funds.

