<!--start metadata-->
Title: Overseas shipping
Description: radio talk
Date: 30/04/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO SPEECH by Mr Malcolm Fraser, Minister for Education and 
Science and Member for Wannon.


        OVERSEAS SHIPPING

   With the announcement during the week that Australia will 
purchase two container vessels for the overseas trade, this country 
entered into a new era of international shipping.

   The decision will give Australia an early entree in the 
trades with the U.K., Europe and North America at the beginning of 
a world revolution in sea transport.

   We will do this on advantageous financial terms as a result 
of negotiations resulting in price benefits for the building of a 
number of vessels.

   One of the advantages of purchasing the vessels instead of 
chartering them as earlier proposed is that they will be operated 
with Australian crews and sailed under the Australian flag. This 
is a matter for some pride for all Australians.

   What does this entail, this step that the Government has 
taken with such far—reaching implications for Australia's trade 
fortunes?

   It means that we will be operating our own container vessels 
in the Australia—U.K.—Europe trade and in the Australia—North America 
run.

   In the Australia—U.K.—Europe conference we will, through the 
Australia National Line, enter into a joint venture with the British 
shipping lines comprising Associated Container Transportation (Australia) 
Ltd. Australia is to buy the vessel known as ACT 3, which was launched 
in Germany in recent weeks.

   This ship is to be bought on terms which stand comparison with 
any terms available in the world — at 20 per cent deposit with a loan 
repayable over eight years at an interest rate of 52 per cent on the 
reducing balance. The price is advantageous because of the time the 
orders were placed and because of the fact that the ACT tines had 
orders for three vessels with the builders. This resulted in price 
benefits in which Australia has been able to share.

   Considering the Labor Party's past policies in favour of 
establishing Australia's own overseas shipping facilities, the 
Opposition in Federal Parliament during the week took a most 
remarkable attitude to the Government's plans. Opposition speakers 
seemed at a loss in putting any coherent view on the plans, and 
indeed the whole tenor of their remarks suggested that Australia 
should not have entered into overseas shipping arrangements. This 
view seems incompatible with their previous attitudes and is 
difficult to understand.

           -2—



   Under the arrangement as negotiated, Australia's ship 
ACT 3 will be delivered by the builders at the end of July.

   Our entry into these shipping arrangements carry more than 
immediate savings in the purchase of ships, or access to agencies 
and ancillary facilities of the Conferences. It means that 
Australia will be 'right inside' the administrative workings of 
the Conferences and will be party to the vital information on 
costs, schedules and returns in the shipping revolution ahead and 
be involved in the important shore—based interests of the
consortium.

   As Australia is the world's 13th most important trading 
nation, intelligence of this nature is of prime importance. Our 
total exports to Britain and the European Economic Community was 
about $800 million in the last financial year, and our imports 
from Britain, West Germany and France alone were worth around 
$1000 million.

   At present the group in which we have membership have about 
a 20 per cent share of shipping tirade involved. Australia by becoming 
a member of ACT (Ault) Ltd., has negotiated the right to carry 74 per 
cent of this total Australia — U:K. — Continent cargo. In the 
Australia—North America trade, members of the consortium, withwhich 
Australia is linked, carry some 50 per cent of that trade which, 
last financial year, involved Australian exports worth $457 million 
and imports of $980 million.

   The Government's decisions should have impact on our
balance of payments in the years to come, in the extra number of 
round trips per year, in new handling techniques, and their effect 
on our total shipping costs which in 1967 totalled $377 million 
for freight and insurance on imports alone. There would be similar 
freight and insurance costs on our exports. There will be advantages 
in access to shipping agencies, stevedoring and other shore facilities. 
The decisions will prove of benefit to exporters of a wide range 
of goods, including wool, wheat and meat, which form a substantial 
percentage of our total export trade.

   These developments are concurrent with the Government's plans 
as far as the Australia—Japan trade are concerned. In a partnership 
with the Japanese K—Line and the Flinders Shipping Company, the 
Australian National Line is acquiring a vehicle deck/container 
freighter named the 'Australian Enterprise' which will be launched 
by the wife of the Australian Prime Minister in Japan next month. 
The 11,000 tons (deadweight) vessel is expected to go into service 
in September. The 'Australian Enterprise' has been designed especially 
for the Australia—Japan trade and will be the first ship in the 
Sea—Road Service between the two countries. Two other similar 
vessels are being built for the K—Line and the three ships will 
initially make round voyages of 28 days, calling at three 
Australian and four Japanese ports in a pattern of fortnightly sailings 
to and from Australia.

•








        EXPORT BAN ON MERINO RAMS


           During the week there was more discussion about the 
        Government's decision to partially lift the export ban on 
        Merino rams after receiving a recommendation that this be done 
        from the Australian Wool Industry Conference.

           A vigorous defence of the decision to allow only 300 rams 
        a year to be exported came from the chairman of the Conference, 
        Sir Ewen Waterman, who said that the decision meant that Australia 
        would be helping the cause of wool.

           The Conference is regarded as the only single organisption 
        designed to represent all woolgrowers. No—one believes it is 
        perfect, but a start had to be made somewhere. This was it.

           There is no reason why modifications cannot be made to the 
        AWIC in the future.

           One of the unfortunate things about the wool industry 
        is that having established a forum those who have been in minorities 
        in relation to certain matters have then sought to go over the
        heads of the AWIC to have the decision reversed. And on this issue, 
        the merino embargo, it has led those in the minority, or some of them 
        at least, to appeal directly to the Minister and the Government not 
        to accept the decision of the majority of the Conference.

           If this sort of appeal were to be successful, the Conference 
        itself will be destroyed. Those who pre now in the minority should 
        think pretty carefully before they pursue this course too
        vigorously

           The only way in which the Conference can work and succeed is 
        by building up respect for its decisions in such a way that the 
        industry will accept them and the Government where possible, will 
        act upon them.

