<!--start metadata-->
Title: Overseas investment, price of wool
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 8/10/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                   3HA Sunday, 8 October, 1972. 
                                   3YB Thursday, 12 October, 1972. 
                                   3LK Wednesday, 11 October, 1972.
BROADCAST:



      For many years Australians have become accustomed to
continuing economic development at home.  Development has 
become almost taken for granted and we often haven't thought 
very much about the forces which have made it possible.

      One of the most vital forces has been the steady injection
of overseas capital into Australia. The Government has long 
made it plain that the most welcome overseas capital is that 
employed in partnership with Australian owned capital.
However, there has been an increasing trend towards overseas 
ownership in Australia and the Government has undertaken an 
initial study of the complex problems which it raises.

      A more detailed study is now necessary and the results 
will be announced as soon as practicable.

      However, in respect of one particular form of overseas 
ownership and control — foreign takeovers — the Government 
has decided that action can be taken without awaiting the
final outcome of that full review. Foreign takeovers are
an emotional kind of thing.  They can result in control as 
well as ownership passing from Australian to foreign hands, and 
sometimes foreign takeovers also result in limiting competition. 
People and governments are fully justified in being concerned 
about this.

      On the other hand, of course, foreign takeovers can
revive an ailing company or they may be made at a price permitting 
the Australian recipients to reinvest the proceeds at a 
considerably increased return.

                               - 2


              The Government policy has long been that it should do 
        all it can to prevent a particular takeover when it was 
         considered to be against the national interest. Under the 
        policy announced in May, takeovers likely to limit competition 
        will be subject to examination and report by the Monopolies 
        Commission which is to be established.

              But more has to be done and the Government is acting 
        firmly. We intend to legislate to prevent foreign takeovers 
        considered to be against the national interest.
•             In this talk, I won't try to cover all the ways in which 
        we, the Government, will judge what is and what is not against 
        the national interest, but I should say that foreign takeover 
        proposals, which the Government believes warrant detailed 
        investigation, will be referred to an independent authority 
        to be analysed, and decisions on individual cases will be taken 
        by the Government after consideration of the independent 
        authority's report.

             The Government has made three other associated decisions 
        to deal with the problem of overseas investment in Australia. 
        Firstly, we have decided to act to reduce the level of short 
•       term borrowings by Australian residents overseas. Secondly the 
        Government proposes to abolish the guidelines which, since 1965, 
        have limited the freedom of overseas-owned companies to borrow 
        in Australia. The situation has changed since then. The need 
        now is to limit overseas borrowings, not to encourage them by 
        restricting local borrowing.

             At present portfolio investment, particularly by Australian 
        residents, is not permitted. We have decided to relax this 
        policy while retaining the need for exchange control approval 
        of such transactions.

             The Government's decisions have not been taken lightly. 
        Australia has benefited greatly from overseas capital in the 
        past and we continue to welcome it on fair and reasonable
        terms. We aim to have greater Australian participation in

                                                         •••/3

    overseas-owned companies. Our concern is to see that overseas 
    capital is employed in Australia in real partnership with 
    Australian-owned capital.






       In the last week, we have all seen what we can only regard 
    as utterly unexpected rises in the price of wool.

•      What has happened in the last few weeks reminds us of one 
    of the main deficiencies of the present method of selling wool. 
    The auction system accentuates every rise and every fall.

       It is very pleasant for growers when the price is on the 
    up, but we know from past experience that it does not last 
    forever.

       The nature of the auction system has built into it what 
    many regard as an inherent instability. And while I am
    delighted for every grower who is getting the benefit of higher 
    prices at the moment and I certainly hope it persists throughout 
    the whole season, I also hope that it does not weaken anyone's 
•   resolution to press for marketing reform.

       In their own way, the tragedy of the fall last year and 
    the extent of the rise this year both demonstrate and underline 
    the basic need for reform to bring long term stability to this 
    industry. Our legislation to establish a new powerful Australian 
    Wool Corporation is evidence of the Government's determination 
    to achieve this.

