<!--start metadata-->
Title: The Brenner case
Description: press statement
Date: 22/10/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRESS STATEMENT;                                   October 22nd,1961
                                    THE BRENNER CASE

                         Over the last two or three weeks there has been a fair 
           bit of publicity throughout Australia about the Brenner case. The 
           substance of this case is that Mr. Brenner applied for positions in at
           least one Australian University.      The Minister for Immigration, 
           Mr. Downer, refused to supply Mr. Brenner with a visa on grounds of 
           security.
                         This kind of situation imposes grave difficulties on any
           Government.   The practice that Mr. Downer has followed and other 
           Ministers of the present Government was first laid down by Mr. Chifley, 
           who founded the Security Service and who recognised the need for it. 
           Mr. Chifley, later Dr. Evatt, and later again Ministers of the present 
           Government, all refused to reveal the reasons for decisions which were 
           based on Security reports.
                          The present Opposition seems to have departed from this 
           rule, laid down by its predecessors, because they have pressed more than 
•          once for Mr. Downer to give the reasons for his refusal. The Opposition 
           knows, as did Mr. Chifley and Dr. Evatt in their day, that the reasons 
           cannot be given because once you give the reason, which is based on a
           Security report, you betray your sources of information. when this 
           happens, at the very least your source of information dries up. At 
           the worst, it could mean the death of a British agent somewhere not 
           necessarily behind the Iron Curtain.
                           There are other reasons why the traditions which have 
           been established in our Security Service should be maintained. The 
           United States and Great Britain both have a very high regard for 
           security arrangements inside this country. for this reason, they give 
           us information which would not otherwise be available to the Australian
           Government.   This information is often most valuable.
•                          If any Australian Government started to give away 
           information that was obtained as a result of a Security report, we 
           would receive much less co-operation and much less information from 
           our Allies.
                            It has been suggested that a Tribunal should be 
           created at which a person could hear the charges against him and argue
           about them.   Even if such a Tribunal sat in camera this would achieve 
           the very purpose that enemies of this country would want. Assuming 
           that the Security reports were accurate and that a grave security 
           risk is involved in allowing a person to come to Australia, in this 
           secret Tribunal all the evidence would be told the person concerned. 
           He would pass this information on to other people who would like to 
           hear it and our source of information would still be betrayed with 
           the consequences that I mentioned.
                            It has been said in Parliament that Mr. Downer has 
           been more liberal in the visas he has issued than previous Ministers. 
           Having regard to this, when he gets up in Parliament and says that a 
           grave Security risk is involved I am prepared to take his word for it

                                         2

           and in matters of this kind it is essential to believe in someone.
                      I would sooner believe in Mr. Downer, who is a known patriot, 
           than in Mr. Brenner who, in his own confession, said he was a member 
           of the Stern Gang for 5 years, who became a Sergeant Instructor in the 
           Stern Gang, again on his own confession, and who most certainly would 
           not have received this distinction if he had not been adept in the 
           methods employed by this terrorist group. Murder and assassination 
           were the specialty of the Stern Gang.
                      Mr. Brenner's membership of the Stern Gang alone would have 
           been enough for a great number of people to keep him out of the country. 
           Since Mr. Downer has said that this is not the basis of Mr. Brenner's 
           rejection, the charges must be serious indeed.
                      It is a strange thing in regard to public reaction in these
           matters.   Very often if there has been a r;uropean type brawl in 
           Melbourne in which somebody gets knifed, we see charges in the press 
           that our screening methods are not sufficiently strict, that our 
           Immigration program is allowing people into this country who should 
           not come in, and then when a person who, on his own admission, has 
•          belonged to the Stern Gang in the past and is refused a visa, there 
           are many people who jump up and say an injustice has been done. I 
           wonder how the Mothers and r,athers of the Undergraduates who would have 
           been taught by Mr. Brenner at Adelaide University would feel about it, 
           knowing only the fact that he was an active member of the Stern Gang 
           for 5 years. My own children are a long way off University age but 
           I don't think I'd like it very much.
                       There are some interesting aspects of this particular case. 
           To try and prevent the public outcry which is designed to bring the 
           Security Service into disrepute, Mr. Downer offered to show Mr. Calwell 
           the Security files in confidence. Other members of the Labor Party 
           would not allow Mr. Calwell to look at the files because they felt that 
           if he was shown the files in confidence his hands would be tied. At 
           least Mr. Calwell would have been able to reassure his own hot-headed 
           supporters that Mr. Downer had acted justly, as I am confident he has. 
           I do not believe his hot-headed supporters wanted to be so re-assured 
           because this looked like being a good opportunity for embarrassing
           the Government.  It is significant that Mr. Calwell has not once 
           spoken on this issue. As a former Minister of Immigration and as 
           the founder of the Australian Immigration program he probably has a 
           pretty good idea of the kind of report on which Mr. Downer has based 
           his decision.
                       By refusing to look at the files Mr. Calwell made it 
           possible for some of the hot-heads in his Party to make great play of
           this issue.  In doing so, unwittingly, they can only assist enemies 
           of this country.
                        This kind of situation always places democratic countries 
           in a dilemma. The actions that they must take for their own security
           seem, at times, to contradict the principles of Democracy. It can 
           look like convicting a man without trial, but if anyone does think
           in this fashion they must know and they must believe that the prime

                   3

      duty of any Government is to protect its own people and every 
      Government has the right and the responsibility to do this and the 
      right and responsibility to decide who shall or who shall not come 
      into the country, having this in mind.
          There is one final point. Some people have asked why 
      do we refuse to give a person a visa when that same person has been 
      allowed into the United Kingdom. There are several reasonable 
      answers to this and it should not be difficult to guess what they 
      are. Is it not possible that British Security or Australian Security 
      have discovered something about such a person since he went to the 
      United Kingdom? Is it not possible that the United Kingdom 
      authorities do not want to go to Court to cancel that person's visa 
      because, in Court, British Security's information and, consequently, 
      its source would have to be revealed with the same consequences 
      that would be involved in the publication of Security reasons in 
      Australia? Further,is it not possible that the United Kingdom 
•     authorities would wait for a visa to expire when it would quietly 
      not be renewed; and, finally, if a person was known to be an agent 
      of some foreign power in the United Kingdom it might well be that 
      his freedom of movement in the United Kingdom was allowed to remain 
      because, through him, British Security were gaining knowledge of 
      other agents. Any one of these reasons would explain why a person 
      might be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom at least temporarily 
      and will explain why that same person could legitimately be refused 
      a visa into Australia.






•

