<!--start metadata-->
Title: The Hungarian uprising
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 11/08/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                  3F3À~    ;=,/:i7
                                                  3YB;
                       ~ HUN        tTpRI 9úNG,
                  By Malcolm Fraser, =4embar for     .

       Late lest month a Special Committee appointed by thy: Unite
Nations to examine the causes and ùeppenin s during the Hungarian revolutioœ 
made its report. Australia, Denmark, t -lon, Tunisia and truguary com- 
posed the Commi ttee , all of them small powers - a f air cross section from 
 the members of the United Nations.
       we should all take some notice of the report because it reveals 
 all too clearly the deceit at communism and the tragedy at the Nations 
 or Eastern Europe which are dominated by Russia.
       This talk is devoted to the factual findings of the Uni
Nations Special Committee. s itnesses have given evidence of the bitter 
 discontent and low living standards at present in uagary. Ass one 
 witness put it "all production want to Russia and we received in return 
 only Russian trained politicians and Russian troops. No one dared to 
 criticise the Gevernaleat either in public or among friends for fear that
 the Esourity police or the Communist Party might hear it."
       Religious worship was discouraged. The Trade Unions, whic 
 Australia protect end defend the interests of their gibers, in Hungary 
 were little more than agents for the Communist Government. Their 
 function was to communicate and enforce the Government' a instructions 
 and decrees and their Union officials were "alert to detect any member 
 who injudiciously criticised working conditions or any Government order 
 relating thereto." There was no organisation in Hungary to faithfully 
 represent the workers to safeguard their rights and their ineereestes. 
 An Australian trade unionist used to the protection and support his 
 Union gives him would not have recognised the same institutions in
 Hungary.
       The first decision to hold a demonstration was made by
 University students who asked the workers to join them. Certain demands 
 were read out which included the withdrawal of iLussian troops, independ- 
 ence for Hungary, abolition of work norms in factories, freedom of 
 religion in practice and transfer of Uranium mines in Hungary from 
 Russian control to Hungarian control. There was no violence. The
 demabnstretors carried no arms.

        OL the 23rd October a crowd began shouting for
permission to broadcast their demands. It was at this time that the 
Secret police began shooting with a machine gun from inside the 
building. The crowd then went to a nearby Hungarian .+rmy Barracks 
to obtain arms. The conclusion from all the evidence was inescapable 
that the Hungarian Army was on the side of the revolution even the 
Ruesisi troops that had been stationed in Hungary were sympathetic to 
the revolution as they knew it was a genuine workers uprising stemming 
from discontent and poverty.
        The report dismissed esen a remote possibility of any
outside influence organising the revolution and said that it was com- 
pletely unplanned and spontaneous cueing from the conditions d the
time.
        After the 23rd Octobe there was a general strike and then 
with a new Government workers were allowed to elect workers' comc<itteee 
 in their particular factories or shops. They acted quickly on this 
permission dismissing the existing management staff. The general 
strike was to have ended on the 5th November after workers had organised 
 themselves and established taeir own committees. In this period also 
 political prisoners were released and non-cosmuniat newspapers 
 re-apgeered. On the 4th November the Russian take returned in force 
 and it became clear that thair efforts for freedom were doomed to 
 failure. The Russians were slow in acting and in suppressing the 
 revolution because their troops in Hungary were unreliable. There 
 were even isolated instances where they gave their equipment to the 
 Hungarians and Joined in fighting the Latcret Police. However, the 
 troops who came in from the outside were of a different stamp. They 
 set about the task of suppressing the uprising with rhthlessness, speed
 and efficiency.
         fter that da all earlier freedom gained in the
 revolution was quickly abolished sad "since the 4th November there has 
 been no evidence of popular support for Ur. cedar's Government."
    Ioder has proceeded, the report continues, "to destroy the power of 
 the workers step by step.strong repressive 210aeures have been

        traduced and general elections have been postponed for two years. 
He rex'usee in the present circumstances to discuss the withdrawal 
of Soviet troops. Only a sgiall traction of the 190,000 Hungarians 
who fled the country have aeoepted the invitation to return."
                                     tinily of the refugees have come to find safety and 
frseam in British Commonwealth countries, especially in Garotte 
audin Australia.
up for themselves                    To mahy of t se people, freedom and the right to speaksir most important possessions . We 
who take these things for granted seea to forget just how 
important they ere. when we hear the Communists talking of 
pease and equality we should remember Hungary. We must never 
allow ourselves to be persuaded by words. We can only be 
convinced by peaceful actions of the right kind. Actions which 
have just not bean present in recent years from Communist
countbiss.


7 s/iQ57.

