<!--start metadata-->
Title: French bomb tests
Description: press statement
Date: 15/09/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRESS STATENMNT:

       MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                             September 15th,.1963

                                    FRENCH BONG TESTS

                        In the last two weeks the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty has been 
       revived as a public issue by the French decision to conduct nuclear tests 
       in the Pacific area. Earlier this session, Sir Garfield Barwick had made 
       a comprehensive statement on the Treaty, outlining its achievements and its 
       limitations. He then went on to say that it was unfortunate that not all 
       countries had agreed to be bound by the Treaty. General de Gaulle, 
       President of France, in a television interview, welcomed the Treaty but 
       indicated that France would not be bound by it and that France was going 
       to conduct nuclear tests somewhere in the Pacific,

                        Sir Garfield said that it was a matter for "profound 
       regret" that France, by refusing to sign the Treaty, had made the pact 
       less effective than it might otherwise have been. He pointed out that 
       France's refusal to join could provide an excuse for other countries, such 
       as Communist China, to remain outside the pact. It will make it extremely 
       difficult for either Russia or the West to bring pressure to bear on
•      Communist China to cease her tests when the time arrives. In addition, 
       continuance of French testing at some time in the future could serve as an 
       excuse to allow one or more countries to withdraw from the Treaty because 
       the Treaty does provide for the right to withdraw from its obligations if 
       one of the parties believes that its vital interests are being affected and 
       jeopardised by remaining in it.

                        If France achieves independent nuclear power and has the 
       will to employ it, it could bring a disturbing influence to the politics 
       of Europe and the world. This almost certainly will make it much harder
       to arrive at further agreements between the power blocs. In addition, 
       the French decision means that, to some extent, the earth's atmosphere 
       will be further contaminated by radioactive fall-out.

                        When he was in Paris, Sir Garfield said that he expressed 
       to the French Foreign Minister his "deep regret" at the decision that the 
       French Government was then about to take. Later, the Australian Govern- 
       ment, in announcing its intention to sign the Treaty, had urged all 
       countries, including France, to adhere to it.
•
                        New Zealand has taken a similar attitude to Australia and 
       countries in South America have also expressed concern about the proposed 
       French tests in the Pacific. This has led France to issue a statement 
       in Paris which has been conveyed to the Australian Government.

                        The French have taken exception to the fact that we have 
       protested against their tests but they say we did not protest against 
       previous tests that have been undertaken. The French Authorities seem 
       to hava drawn the conclusion that this is unfair discrimination against 
       France. French representatives have said that if the attitude adopted 
       by Australia and the other countries continued, it could endanger friendly 
       relations between France and the countries concerned.

                        At the outset, the French protest was based on a mis- 
       understanding because, for many years, the Australian Government has 
       advocated universally controlled disarmament and a universal Test Ban 
       Treaty.

                        I have taken some pains to explain the language used by 
       Sir Garfield Barwick because I believe it has been moderate and fair and
       needs no apology.  It did not deserve the French reaction which came from



                                                                         /2

                                      -   2

        France last week.  Nevertheless, this reaction seems to be in keeping
        with current French attitudes to international affairs. General de Gaulle 
        seems bent on re-building the glory of France at enormous cost to the 
        average French citizen. He knows that he can only do this if he possesses 
        nuclear power. One may almost wonder if General de Gaulle is remembering 
        the defeats at the hands of the Germans in 1870, 1914 and 1939. For 
        nearly 100 years France has been a defeated nation. General de Gaulle, 
        however, has an intense sense of hs`ory and an intense feeling for the 
        glory of France, It would not be out f keeping with his temperament 
        to want to re-build that country's past greatness. The excuse he gives 
        for continuing nuclear tests and for wishing to build France into a 
        nuclear power is that until general and complete disarmament of nuclear 
        and conventiona? weapons is achieved, it is unsafe for France to rely 
        entirely upon the nuclear deterrent held under NATO control, under 
        British control and under American control. For my part, I do not 
        believe this is a valid excuse, I think it is an excuse thought up to 
        justify his desire to re-build France to her former majesty and greatness 
        and this again would explain the stern and school masterly tones in which 
        France has replied to the feelings expressed by Australia. Australia
        has, of course, rejected the French view and the French protest. We
•       stand firm by what has been said.

                        In taking the attitude that he has, General de Gaulle 
        misconceives the nature of nuclear strategy and the change that the Test 
        Ban Treaty brings about. While there was no Treaty, the western powers 
        could not afford to fall behind the Soviet Union in nuclear technology. 
        These nuclear tests were needed for the west to maintain its deterrent 
        power so that the western world might remain free. On the other hand, 
        while there was no formal Treaty, the Soviet Union would not limit her 
        tests in pursuit of the same kind of knowledge. Both countries have 
        now formally recognised the danger of this race and in signing the Treaty 
        have put an end to it.

                        France is protected, as are all the countries of Europe 
        and, indeed, ultimately Australia, by the protective umbrella that the 
       western deterrent creates for all the free countries. Independent
        nuclear deterrents held in the hands of France or other countries will 
        make ultimate world disarmament and inspection more difficult to achieve.

•                       Australia has rejected the French protest and I believe 
        all Australians will object to the fashion in which Australia has been 
        lectured and the other countries in the Pacific have keen lectured by 
        the President of France. The world is now too small for one country, 
       no matter how large or small, to play this kind of power politics 
        exclusively in her own interests:, ignoring the interests of her allies 
        and the world at large.



                                         Oo

