<!--start metadata-->
Title: Arthur Calwell and New Guinea
Description: press statement
Date: 14/10/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


r


    PRESS STATEMENT:

    MALCOLM FF;ASER:

                                           October 14th,1962



                  ARTHUR CALyE LL AND NEW GUINEA


            Last week, the Prj_me Minister welcomed Mr. Arthur Calwell, the 
    Leader of the Opposition, back to his Parliamentary duties. As we all know, 
    Mr. Calwell had some time in hospital and had undergone an operation.
    However, the Leader of the Opposition is back on the front bench looking well.

            Unfortunately, Arthur Calwell's return to Parliament has not been 
    an entirely happy one because, in his first week, he was forced to rise 
    immediately after another front; bench member of the Opposition, Clyde 
    Cameron from South Australia, and publicly rebuke him for what he had said 
    about New Guinea. This took a great deal of courage because Mr. Cameron 
    is clearly an influential Left Winger in the Labour Party, a very able 
    speaker, and one with quite a few friends in the Labour Caucus.

            The argument between Mr. Cameron and Mr. Calwell arose over New
    Guinea. Mr. Cameron had been speaking on the Estimates for the Departme:.t 
    of External Affairs. The tenor of Mr. Cameron's speech was that Australia 
    had-done a lousy job in New Guinea and that we had ree taken care of the 
    indigenous population,
            Mr, Cameron said that people were taken from the backblocks of 
    New Guinea, such as from the Sepik River, and sold to plantation owners 
    for £20 a head.

            Mr. Cameron continued that such people were then examined and if 
    they were found to be suitable for employment they were taken 200, 300 or 
    400 miles away from their own villages so that there was no possibility of 
    them being independent of their employers.

            Mr. Cameron went on to say how racial discrimination thrives in 
    New Guinea. He said that the European traders were charging natives more 
    for goods than they charged the Europeans.

            Mr. Cameron said, and I quote his exact words : - "We have to 
    admit that the position is due entirely to our own lack of interest in the 
    future of these people."

            The danger of this sort of position is, of course, that the 
    Russian representatives in the United Nations and in the forums of the 
    world will quote Mr. Cameron as a leading member of the Australian Labour 
    Party describing and criticising the actions of his own people. This does 
    a tremendous amount of damage. It gives the Communist powers a weapon with 
    which they can beat Australia about the head, and in these days of anti- 
    colonialism the newly independent powers are only too ready to believe 
    charges such as these no matter how little truth there is attached to them. 
    This kind of speach does Australia very real damage.

            There used to be a convention in the Australian Parliament as 
    there still is in the United States Congress or in the House of Commons 
    that you can put the boots in as hard as you like so far as the Government 
    is concerned, so far as Ministers are concerned and, in return, the Govern- 
    ment can hit the Opposition as hard as it can. But, when it comes to 
    matters that involve Australia's prestige in the world and our relations 
    with other nations, there is a borderline which most of us won't cross. 
    Most politicians will take a political trick when they can but they will 
    not attack without foundation cf fact in a way that can do hnthing but 
    damage to Australia, This is what Clyde Cameron did.


                                                     /2.

f                                                                                •





                                      2


               Arthur Calwell recoreliee this. He realised the damage that 
     Mr, Cameron's speech had done and, therefore, having come into the Chamber 
     he rose immediately following. One would normally have expected a 
     Government member to follow Mr. Cameron but Mr. Calwell felt so strongly 
     about the matter that he took the call. He said:' The honorable member 
     for Hindmarsh (that is Mr. Cameron) is entitled to express his own views 
     and tonight he has expressed his own views and not necessarily those of the 
     Labour Party. Every member has the right to his own opinions, but I don't 
     hold with many of the views that have been expressed by the honorable member 
     for Hindmarsh."

               When you have in mind the fact that Mr. Calwell is Leader of the 
     A.L.P. in the Parliament and Mr. Cameron a leading front bench member, this 
     is a pretty solid rebuke. Normally, if a member says something that is 
     out of line with Government policy or if a member se:- something that is 
     out of line with Opposition policy it goes almost u_:aeiced end Party Leaders 
     certainly do not cone into the Parliament to dissociate their Parties 
     publicly from the views expressed by an individual member, but because of 
     the importance of the position, because of the fact that the speech could 
     affect Australia's overseas relations, Mr, Calwell felt that he had to do
     this to dissociate the Labour Party. Mr. Calwell said :- "The honorable 
     member for Hindmarsh bas been rather extravagant in his criticism. I do not 
     agree that nothing has been done in the Territory in the last 60 years. 
     I was a member of the Government which at least started to effect some 
     improvements there in the postwar years and that work has been added to 
     since then."

               Mr. Calwell showed a great deal of courage in acting in the way 
     he did because as I said, Mr, Ca_ ..9,77;1 is a persuasive and influential member
     of the Labour Party.  Australia sou.ld thank the Leader of the Opposition 
     for putting the record straight over this matter in a much more effective 
     manner than any Government member or Minister could have done. For example, 
     if the Minister for Territories had said what Mr. Calwell had said, impartial 
     critics may have believed that the Minister was just protecting his own 
     position, a thing that he would have to do as Minister, but when the Leader 
     of Mir. Cameron's own Party comes and says the kind of things that were said 
     we should be thankful because no one could say Mr. Calwell did not mean 
     every word.

               Australian policy in Australian New Guinea is bi-partisan. We 
     are spending about £201. a year in the area to develop it, to give the people 
     and the natives some education and to try and build up the resources of the 
     area in the hope that the pressures of world politics íi11 give us time to 
     stay in New Guinea long enough to leave the country in a. proper state so 
     that it can sensibly carry on its own affairs, Australia as a whole can 
     take pride in what has been done. This does not mean that we should not 
     do more but the.United Nations Committees that have visited the Territory 
     from time to time, while clearly being critical in certain respects have, 
     on the whole, praised the Australian Administration and the enthusiasm and 
     dedication of the Administration's officers. We spend £2CM. a year in New 
     Guinea for no financial return and with no expectation of any return. This 
     alone should answer Mr. Cameron's claim that Aústralians.don't care about 
     the New Guinea people.




                                    o0o

