<!--start metadata-->
Title: Dr Cairns, Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 6/07/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Leader of the. Opposition









   ELECTORAL TALK                        FOR SUNDAY 6TH JULY,:1975
                                           THURSDAY 10TH JULY, 1975


   MEMBER FOR WANNON AND LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION






   The sacking of Dr. Cairns by the Prime Minister has not 
   ended the affair of the Government's loan raising.

   This disreputable situation is destined to drag on until
   the Prime Minister summons the courage to face its consequences
   fully.


   He must set up a full and open judicial inquiry and he must 
   do it immediately.

   That is the responsibility of a Prime Minister   to ensure
   on behalf of the people of Australia that their .Government 
   is a decent and honest one.

   If he does not establish this inquiry, Mr. Whitlam will be
   acknowledging that his Government does not meet the standards 
   of propriety which the people of Australia are entitled to
   expect.

   The Government has already forfeited any claim it might 
   once have put forward to being an efficient administration.


   The present rates of inflation, of unemployment and of 
   interest on loans and mortgages, bear witness to the 
   Government's incompetence.


    It has also largely forfeited its claims to common sense.

    There is a lack of balance when the Prime Minister wants to 
    hang his own photograph in public buildings instead of the 
   Queen, although this is a matter which can easily be put
    right.   In due course, Mr. Whitlam's photograph will be 
    taken down.


    But when the same lack of balance is applied to raising loans 
    abroad, the results can be disastrous, as in this case they 
    have been.


    The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, the Minister for Minerals 
    and Energy, Mr. Connor, and the now sacked and disgraced 
    Dr. Cairns, appear to have made Australia a laughing stock 
    in international financial circles.


  Commonwealth Offices. 4 Treasury Place, Melbourne, Victoria 3002

ELECTORAL TALK          -2-           6/7/75 & 10/7/75


The Nation's credit rating, once second to none, has been
impugned.  There were difficulties raising the last, proper, 
loan in the United States.

This situation has been produced because Dr. Cairns, Mr. Connor 
and the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, authorised between them 
a host of fringe business men to raise a huge and improbable 
loan, as best they could, through any channels, from the Arab 
nations of the Middle East.

It is not just the Americans, the Swiss and the British who
have been made to laugh at us. The relevations in the 
newspapers indicate that even the Saudi Arabians are taken 
aback by Australia's funny money dealings with brokers and 
fixit men in London's Half Moon Street and Hounslow.

Mr. Whitlam has tried to escape from the consequences of his
actions by sacking Dr. Cairns. But the letter which 
Mr. Connor wrote to Mr. Khemlani remains a secret.

Mr. Whitlam sacked Dr. Cairns from the Treasury when he 
learned of the full ramifications of the affair.

But he sacked him from the Ministry only when the public, 
through the press, also learned how wide and murkily the 
affair had spread.

The prime Minister appeared to be prepared to suppress the 
matter as long as he could.

There is much that he is still keeping secret from the 
people of Australia.

Although much of Dr. Cairns' activity has become public, 
the Prime Minister appears to be trying to load him with 
total responsibility for the Government's actions.

He will not be able to cleanse the Government's hands that 
way.

Why does the Prime Minister not order Mr. Connor to disclose 
the contents of a similar authorisation to another money 
broker, Mr. Khemlani.

Mr. Whitlam told Parliament that the loan of 4,000 million 
dollars initially, and then of 2,000 million dollars, which 
Dr. Cairns and Mr. Connor were attempting to raise through 
unconventional channels, and against the advice of the 
Treasury, was for matters connected with energy.

Yet on the facts which have now come to light, only some of 
the money was for energy.
                                                   ••/

ELECTORAL TALK-3-   6/7/75 & 10/7/75

The rest was described in an official document as being for 
matters arising out of the current world situation, and to 
-strengthen Australia's external financial position and to
provide for current and immediately forseeable unemployment.

The Prime Minister is thus also guilty of misleading 
Parliament.

He has attempted to mask the purposes of this extraordinary 
loan.

Above all, he failed to provide competent and honest 
Government for Australia.

