<!--start metadata-->
Title: Pastoral Research Station in Western Victoria
Description: radio talk
Date: c1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


5—MINPTE TALK BY M!ALCOLM FRASER , M, H R. FOR WANNON.
     Some time ago there was quite a lot of publicity 
concerning the possible establishment of e Pastoral Research 
Station in Western Victoria undertaken as a joint organisation 
between the C.S.I,R,O. and the State Department of Agriculture.
     Last week I sought the latest information on this
matter from the Minister in Charge of C. S. I. R.O. and I thought 
many people may be interested in the latest position concerning 
this Research Station and therefore I want to give the full story 
as it stands at the present time.
     In November 1955 the Premier of Victoria approached
the Prime Minister to see if the Commonwealth would join with
the Government of Victoria in establishing a Pastoral Research
Station in the Western Did;rict of Victoria.
     The matter was referred to officers of the C. S.I. R, O.
and'the Victorian Department of Agriculture who carried out a
survey in Western Victoria. The general conclusions reached by
the survey were these:— 
     Firstly, that there was a variety of problems, both
of pastures and livestock, which were responsible for substantial
losses in productivity and which were preventing the development
of the region to its full productive potential.
      Secondly, the problems appeared to involve investigation
of pasture establishment, maintenance and management, and livestock
nutrition and management. It was believed that the problems would
be susceptible to investigation by simple but carefully planned
field studies.
      Thirdly, the pasture and livestock problems did not
appear to be of such a character as to justify the establishment
of a research laboratory or the purchase of an area for long term
research.
      Following upon the survey which led to these con- 
clusions, Sir Ian Clunies Ross, Chairman of the C. S. I. R. O. and 
Mr. Ryan, Director of the Department of Agriculture in Victoria, 
submitted a number of recommendations which involved the leasing 
by the Victorian Department of Agriculture of 500-750 acres of

            _2_
land. The overall responsibility for staffing and maintenance 
of the field station would belong to the Victorian Department of 
Agriculture whilst the G. S.I. ?, 0, would be consulted in connection 
with the experimental programme and would, on its own initiative, 
undertake certain pasture plant improvement work on the station 
which would involve the possible development of pasture plants 
especially suited to the needs of Western Victoria.
      I think it is most significant that at its last meeting
the Wool Research Committee which was established by this
Government at the end of last session to examine problems relating 
to wool research so that wool may maintain its competitive position 
in the world's markets. At its last meeting, this Committee 
recommended that grants of £5,000 be made for establishment costs 
of this research station and that a grant of £3,000 per annum be 
made towards the cost of salaries and maintenance.
      This is one of the small ways in which the Wool 
Research Committee is getting down to its practical job of helping 
wool growers solve many of the problems involved in the growth 
of wool.
      From the latest information I have available, the
Victorian Department of Agriculture is at present looking for a 
suitable area which it could use for the purposes which were 
outlined in this survey. It would be impossible, of course, to 
say exactly where the research station may be situated because 
that will depend in a large measure where suitable property can 
be found.
      There is one other thing on which I would like to say 
a few words tonight. Last week, the general debate on the Budget 
finished. In this debate, many Members from both sides of the 
House discussed the particular aspects of the Government's financial 
 policy and its influence upon different sections of the community. 
 I have already reported upon the Budget in fairly full detail but 
you may wonder why the House is still involved in debating matters 
 stemming from the-Budget. Once the debate on the Budget in general 
has been completed, the House gets down to the solid business of 
debating the estimates in detail. During the debate on the 3stimates,

             -3—
each Department is taken singly and the subject for the debate 
is, broadly, the administration of the Department and the wisdom 
of the Department's expenditure for the coming year.
     During the debate on the Estimates the Ministers con- 
cerned are nearly always in the Chamber listening to the points 
brought forward by Members and often the Minister will rise during 
the debate to answer points made by Members during the course of 
the Estimates debate.
     In the House of Representatives, the periods which any 
Member may speak are limited for the different kinds of debate by 
what are called the Standing Orders and for the Estimates, a 
Member may speak on any one Department for 15 minutes and if there 
is a further period available in the debate on that Department and 
if another Member who has not spoken does not claim the time, the 
Member may speak for a second period of 15 minutes.
     It is during the Estimates debate that Members are 
given a chance to reveal detailed knowledge of administration 
and departmental affairs.
     The debate on the Estimates is expected to last
until nearly the end of this month.

