<!--start metadata-->
Title: Berlin
Description: press statement
Date: 10/09/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                               /(o.
             PRESS STATEMENT
                                                           September 10th,1961

                      Over the last several years the Communist powers and Russia 
             in particular have, at times, won some public support because of the 
             way in which they have used the cause of peace and freedom for
             propaganda purposes.   To give an example. We canpprobably all 
             remember the banner headlines that our press gave the original 
             Russian proposals for complete disarmament of all kinds within 4 years. 
             This is clearly an objective which every sane person would want if 
             it was possible of achievement. However, in response to this 
             Russian plan, the patient and painstaking western moves to point 
             out that any disarmament plan is pointless without inspection and 
             without adequate control did not achieve the same publicity as the 
             original proposal. Western thoughts were, furthermore, more 
             difficult to get across to the people of the world because under- 
             standing of inspection and of control require some painstaking study.
                      However, in more recent times, it is my belief that the West 
             has been able to break through in driving home to people of all 
             nations that disarmament, whetherconventional or nuclear, demands 
             adequate inspection and adequate control if we are not to betray
             our own rights and our own freedom.  In more recent times again
             the shallowness of the Russian approach to this problem has been
             underlined. They have shown themselves clearly and without doubt
             to be uninterested in adequate and proper disarmament but interested
             only in the propaganda that they can achieve from talking about it
             and in the effect that this can have in persuading the West to
             lower its guard if we are not careful.
                       Because the talks on general disarmament appeared to be
             bogged down again largely over the question of control and inspection,
             the great powers, some years ago, began to meet together to discuss
             nuclear disarmament and a permanent test ban Treaty. This special
•            move was taken because of the urgency of the problem and because of
             the concern expressed by many people throughout the world on
             continued atomic tests. During the period of negotiations, the
             United Kingdom, the United States and Soviet Russia, so far as we know,
             voluntarily gave up nuclear tests.  In all, the negotiations went 
             on for over 3 years and only this year it appeared as though it 
             might be possible to get agreement. The Russians appeared willing 
             to go some way towards accepting inspection proposals that would
             satisfy 'estern security requirements. In turn, the United States 
             and the United Kingdom had reduced the number of annual on site 
             inspections which they felt were essential for their own and for 
             our security.
                        Just as hopes of reaching agreement were running reasonably 
             strongly in Western capitals, the Russians suddenly said that the 
             body carrying out the inspection program should be composed of three 
             men - one from the Nest, one from the Russians and one from the
             so-called neutrals.  The Commission would not be able to act unless
             it was unanimously in agreement.   This meant that any one of the 
             powers would have a veto over the activities of the inspection
             Commission.

                                       -  2 -
                 quite clearly, therefore, if the Russians wished to undertake a
           test in some area, the Russian representative would know of it and he 
           would say if the others asked for an inspection : -No, we cannot have
           an inspection there.   This clearly made the whole inspection program 
           utterly unworkable. When this was pointed out to the Russians they 
           walked out of the test ban talks and now, within the last week, we have 
           heard first that the Russians were going to resume tests and, secondly, 
           .+o hours later, news of the first nuclear explosion came through showing 
           that Russia's presence at the Geneva talks on disarmament has for several
           months been sheer hypocrisy.  You can't mount a nuclear test explosion 
           in a few hours, it takes several months of work and effort. If Premier 
           Krushchev's word can be taken as correct, the . ussian scientists are 
           going to build a bomb many times bigger than anything that has yet been
           constructed.  While the West was and is still willing to resume disarma- 
           ment talks these activities afford clear evidence that the Russians 
           have for years been treating these talks as a pure form of propaganda 
           without any genuine will to reach agreement.
•                These latest moves have shattered the hopes of many people right 
           around the world who were hoping that a nuclear test ban Treaty would
           eventually lead to a more generalldisarmament. However, if our hopes 
           have been shattered and broken, the recent actions on the part of the 
           Russians should serve as clear warning that we cannot for one moment 
           relax our vigilance or our efforts to play our part together with our
           Allies in defence of freedom.   These latest Russian moves have been 
           designed to frighten us. They will not. They will merely stiffen 
           our resolve.
                  The Russians made some statement that recent events in Berlin
           had forced them to resume nuclear tests. They have also used recent 
           events in Berlin as an excuse for gradually expanding their defence 
           budget and for postponing any move from the permanent forces to the 
•          reserves in the Russian Army. i;ven though Mr. Krushchev is using 
           Berlin as an excuse we should realise that this is merely an excuse, 
           for if there is a Berlin problem as there is, it is one that he has 
           created, and if there is tension between the Eastern and the 'Western 
           powers because of Berlin it is because of actions that the Russians 
           and the German Democratic Republic, that is, East Germany, have taken.
                    Since the Berlin question is prominently in people's minds 
           I will deal with it next week.

