<!--start metadata-->
Title: New trade agreement
Description: radio talk
Date: 2/12/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON 
                          comments on
                      NEW TRADE AGREEMENT.



         Over the last few weeks the tragic events in Hungary 

 and in the Middle East drove Australia's own domestic problems right 

 into the background and now in the midst of what appears to be most 

 happy and successful Olympic Games in Melbourne we are still perhaps 

 a little unwilling to bring our minds down to the hard realities of 

 of our own problems, but because they are so real, lasting and 

 importait r r the future I would like to say just a few words about 
         /4ink
 the new rade Agreement which, in part at least, should help in

 solving them.

         Our basic problem lies, as if often has in the past, in 
 the fact that we are trying to buy from abroad more than we can 

 afford and if allowed to continue such a state could only lead to
 national insolvency.  The Government has been trying to tackle 

 this problem from two angles.

         It has severely restricted imports into this country 

 by a system of import licences and quotas which has at times acted 

 with great severity on certain sections of the cdmmunity, and on the 

 other hand it has tried to encourage people to export more than they 

have before. To do this, in the first part of the year the Govern- 
ment passed a Bill which initiated an Exports Payment Guarantee

plan.    The purpose of this Bill was to encourage manufacturers to

export into new markets.   The actual provisions of the Bill have 
made it possible for manufacturers to insure themselves against

failure to pay in certain specific instances by purchasers. In 
general terms the Bill would make it possible for manufacturers to 

take risks which would normally be beyond their capacity. It is 

hoped by encouraging them to do this that we may ultimately break 

into new markets and open up kew trade for Australia.

                             2

N

       For many months Mr. McEwen, Minister for Trade, has also tmitg 

 been trying to get the Ottawa Agreement between England and Australia

reviewed.   Under this criginal Agreement first signed in 1932 we


granted England large preferences on her goods that came into this

country.    These preferences have been lasting and they have been

real but through the passage of time the preferences that Britain

gave us on her market had become useless and also the commodities 

that were affected byn them then are not so important to us now as 

they once were.


       It was largely to alter this position tomake it possible for

us to gain a larger share of the British market and at the same time 
     4 "-s
to make Australia more competitive that a new Trade Agreement was 

sought.   Australia has been a closed shop for British manufacturers

because of the very high preference duties that discriminated against

continental M„r..f4-44 - „^. Under the new Agreement Australia may

substantially lower the margins so that the British preference is far

smaller than it was formerly.   This should lower the cost to Australia

of many types of goods brought from Europe.

       At the same time, various guarantees have been given by the 

British Government that should help us to maintain and increase our

share of the English market.    Perhaps the most important individual cas
                                next
has been the fact that over the ±xxt five years England is to take


28,000,000 bushels of wheat a~nnua,~ly from ustralia - this could mean a 
                          ls~~-.,c i~{,c A
very great deal.   In thisyear, because of crop failures in Europe

our wheat exports may reach this guaranteed level but by contrait 

in 1954 when there were good seasons in Europe our exports were as low 

as 13,000,000 bushels.

      Under the Agreement England is to take 25,000,000 bushels for

5 years.    England has also agreed to try and restrict the effects 

of dumpting on her market by foreign competitors - dumping which could 

do a great deal to destroy our own legitimate and traditional markets. 

The principle of restricted tariffs between England and Australia 

has been maintained but at the same time Australia has been given a 

little more freedom within the Agreement to alter certain tariffs if

it is thought necessary.  If advantage is taken of this position by

                                MID (2



the Australian Government competition on this market. between
British and European manufacturers could become aax more real.
In the past preference of British goods has made them almost immuned
from any kind of outside competition.             Under these conditions we

have not always bought as cheaply as we might.
               It will take time to see how the new Trade Agreement
works.       I don't believe it will substantially alter our pattern 

of trade and in itself it cannot cure our balance of trade problems
but with other concerted efforts directed twoards the same end,
we will go along towards achieving aattrue balance in our international 
trade - that is a true balance without harsh restrictions of any kind.




              Onè thing is also going to help us in this coming year.
All prices have r en far more than was expected.                 This may be 

due to the Suez cricis, but I hope it is,in part, due to a general 
rise in the demand for ore wool throughout Xwxkxx1±a the world.

It is essential that Austr lia learn to export her secondary industry 
goods and as many of them as\e possibly can in as short a time as
possible.      Until export of secondary industry goods reaches a
level of                             a yak - at present they are well under
                  - we will be extremely pendent upon changes in the

prices of wool because they have such 'a, rge effect on our overallpresent
balance of payments position.           If the pr.]. e`for the i;ixxxxixt year
is maintained throughout the year, it will do                e than anything

else to get our international accounts on the right., side of the
ledger.

