<!--start metadata-->
Title: Tasmanian fires and the army
Description: press statement
Date: 3/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT
MALCOLM FRASER          3 March, 1967

        TASMANIAN FIRES AND THE ARMY

      A short while ago I visited Tasmania, primarily to see
now the Army had helped in the devastating bush fires that had
taken place in and around the Hobart area.
      A good many members of the Regular Army were involved,
in addition to five or six hundred members of the C.M.F. When the
fire broke out, large numbers of the C.M.F. were in the hills on
an exercise and for some time there was concern as to whether they
would be able to get out without difficulty.
      This was, in fact, accomplished without any problems.
The exercise was immediately ended and all members in Tasmania
converted to fire fighting, to relief or to assistance of one kind
or another.
      Generators were flown from the mainland to relieve
severe power shortages; hundreds of mattresses and other bedding
were sent to the Army camp at Brighton where Army huts were immediately
converted for families who had been burnt out. The Army drill hall
in the centre of Hobart was converted to a make-shift hospital and
acted as a collection point for lost children.
      Special signal units had flown down from the mainland
so that all localities would have adequate communications since the
normal civil network had been completely destroyed in many areas.
      A company of the 3rd Battalion, stationed in South
Australia, were flown to the area to relieve C.M.F. members who had
to return to their normal civilian jobs. In addition, a good many
of the C.M.F. asked for special leave so that they could stay in the
Army while they were making a direct contribution to fire fighting
or to fire relief.
      Army transport had shifted very large quantities of hay
for stock, of water, medical supplies, food and clothing and bedding,

•
                  2.

   as well as general stores which were urgently needed. On one day 
   30 tons of lime were carted to different areas to help dispose of 
   sheep and cattle that had been burnt.
         Special buildings were taken to Snug and were erected 
   there. This area was perhaps worse hit than anywhere else in the 
   fire.
         Every member in the Army in Tasmania has every right 
   to be proud of the work that has been accomplished. They have 
   provided a great deal of relief to a large number of people and this 
   is still continuing.
         There are still 40 families, for example, in the 
   Brighton Army camp and members are still helping clear up rubble 
   and removing rubbish from burnt out buildings. Some help is being 
   given to local authorities to restore road communications. Water 
   tanks and water supplies are being re-established in some of the 
   devastated areas.
         During the fire, over 50,000 sheep were burnt, up to 
   300 dairy cattle and 1,000 beef cattle, 600 pigs and 50,000 poultry.
         About 1,000 square miles were affected by the fires, a 
   very large mileage of fencing has been destroyed and many farms have 
   been completely wiped out. Orchards, which have taken 10 years to 
   mature have, in some instances, been destroyed. Over 1,410 homes 
   were burnt and, worst of all, 54 people lost their lives in the 
   fires.
         I spent quite some time flying over the fire areas and 
   one of the remarkable things about it is that a great number more 
   homes were not destroyed. In many cases you would see where fires 
   had come right to the house,but left the house untouched, whereas 
   the house next door would be completely destroyed. The fire on the 
   edge of Hobart had gone right to the edge of some streets without 
   touching the houses. In other streets the fire had probably been 
   no hotter and no more dangerous but all the houses had been burnt.

               3.

There was no obvious explanation for this. It was a wonder that more 
homes had not been destroyed.
      I think everyone should be pleased at the way 
organisations and individuals have rallied to the cause and
provided help and assistance in many different ways for the people 
who suffered as a result of the fires.
      My purpose was to visit the Army units, in particular 
to examine the damage, and to see what we were doing to help and 
would continue doing to help. The Army has certainly gained 
experience in working with the State and local Government authorities 
and the assistance given by the C.M.F. and Regular Army to all the 
people concerned was greatly appreciated. I know very many people 
are most greatful for what the Army has done.
      I believe there will be some valuable lessons learnt 
from this for future civil disasters of this magnitude.
      We must hope and work to see that they don't occur again 
but we also must learn to profit from the experience that has been 
gained on this occasion.
      I thought it might be possible to get some idea of the 
disaster by comparing the number of houses destroyed with some of 
our own local municipalities. I can't vouch definately for these 
figures but I believe they are reasonably accurate.
      There were over 1400 homes destroyed in the fire, there 
are about 1,750 homes in the shire of Glenelg and 614 in Casterton. 
More than twice the number of houses in the town of Casterton were 
burnt, more than the equivalent of two Castertons. There are 1150 
homes in the shire of Wannon and 450 in Coleraine, so the fire 
destroyed more homes than are contained in the whole shire. There 
are 2100 houses in Portland, so the fire, in terms of homes destroyed, 
would have burnt the equivalent of two thirds of Portland. There are 
2900 houses in Hamilton, the fire, in terms of homes destroyed, would 
be equivalent to burning half of Hamilton. More houses were destroyed 
in the fire than are contained in the whole shire of Dundas.

•
 •
                   4.

          This gives some idea of the magnitude of the disaster 
    and the time it will take to re-build and re-construct. The energies 
    of the Tasmanian Government and the Commonwealth Government aryl 
    instrumentalities that are helping must be urgently directed to this 
    end.

