<!--start metadata-->
Title: Canberra events, training conference, road safety
Description: Radio talk
Date: 14/03/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Sunday, 14 T'iarch~ 1971 -- 3HA
`'  
T'hursday, 1P, March, 1971 - -1YB
This week I would like to talk with you about -even.ts. in  
Canberra....a national conference an'trainingsin industry and.  
commerce _and road safety.
CANBERRA EVENTS
By now I am sure that all of you are familiar with the
poli.tical.. events of the past week here in Canberra.
I do not wish to comment any further on these events which
have now passed into the pages of history.
I think it is just sufficient to say that if I had to make
the same decision again, then I would take the same course and.
make that same decision.
If there are any of you who may have misunderstood the series
of events and the reasons why I took the course of action I did take,
drop me a line here in Canberra. and I will send you a copy of the
Hansard report of my speech in the Parliament.
The past is past. I now look forward with renewed vigour and
confidence to the future.
I believe that the new unity of purpose in the Government will
benefit the country and will ensure success for it at the 1972. Feder_a .
Election.
There will be a lot of hait work to be done over the next 20
months by everyone in the Government.
Let me give you my assurance, here and now, that I will
continue to devote my energies to the well-being of Australia generally
and the Wannon Electorate particularly.
TRAINING CONFERENCE
The Government has decided to hold a. National Conference  on
training .in industry and commerce.	
2/	


     The conference will be convened at the Australian National 
University in Canberra from NIltrak i?ay 11 to May 13.
     This Conference will begin the task of asseesing the immediate 
and long term future needs of providing industry and commerce with 
the trained work force necessary to meet Australia's future industria7 
development.
      This will involve assessing the adequacy of our present training 
arrangements and formulating propose ls. for systematic develonment of 
training in a number of occupational areas.
      Overall, its objective will be to achieve a properly balanced 
growth of skills in the Australian work force and determine how future 
training policy and practice can be continually up-dated.
      The human resources of the Australian economy are the key to 
the nation's development.
      The continued growth in occupations requiring high, degrees of 
skill, makes this whole matter of immediate concern to the indiviHT' 
in society. Each person can only reach the highest level of skill of 
which he is capable if he or she is given adequate training ci.:Tort)edtic
      Discussions that have already taken place suggest there are 
many- avenues open for careful examination; with the view to both 
improving and widening the base for vocational treirin,; throughout 
Australia.
      The conference will be attended by senior rerreeent-,tives of 
employer organisations, trade anions, professional institutes xitt 
and State and Federal Government administrations.
ROAD SAFETY
       Last year, 3,800 persons were killed. and :),`) 000 people were 
injured on Australia's roads.
       The staggering number of road accidents are estimated to be 
a 7400-million drain on our national resources.çr

     As a. Government, we recognise that the national problem of 
road accidents cannot be oVercOme•by attackinp: only one aspect of 
the road-driver.-vehicle situation.
     The Commonwealth contributes about a third the cost of road
Construction. In the fivs years to1+ we are giving the States
g1,250-million for roads cnstruction, including a component for 
road safety and planning.
     This year, the Government has increased its expenditure on 
road safety publicity and education to $450,000. This is spent 
on national television, radio and. Press advertising, booklets etc., 
and State road. safety councils.
    Recently, the Commonwealth established a• group of experts to 
undertake research into the basic causes of road accidents and to 
identify the fundamental reasons for the road toll.
    The group are specialists in the medical, engineering, psychology 
statistics and legal disciplines. They will look at the overall 
situation, embracing vehicle and road design, driver education and 
other fields. •
     There has been some notable progress and cooperation between 
Governments and the automotive industry to introduce safety features 
 in motor vehicles, but particularly the family car.
     Already, eight design rules for motor vehicle safety are in 
force, covering such points as seat belts, car windscreen de-misters 
and safety rims.
     A dozen other rules have been endorsed, but are yet to be 
enforced. These include safety glass, head restraints and door safety 
latches and hinges.
      I believe it is to the credit of GoVernment and the vehicle 
industry that we have progressed as far as we• have. But with a
rising road toll we must accelarato our work for a safer- vehicle.
                       ....000....

