<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Council of Trade Unions, industrial relations
Description: electoral talk
Date: 24/05/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              Jj j ~ AUSTRALIA N ~ `- '. s'd < < < K < 4 L~



          PRIME MINISTER



 FOR MEDIA           SUNDAY, 24 MAY,1981

         ELECTORATE TALK


 A couple of months ago, the ACTU President, Mr Dolan, and I 
 agreed to establish regular talks between the Government and 
 the ACTU to discuss our respective points of view on industrial 
 matters, and on other economic matters cf importance to
 Australia. It seemed to me - I hope to both of us - that such 
 talks could be a constructive way of facing up to some of the 
 industrial issues which arise in this country.

 This is a time in Australia's history when it is in the interest 
 of all of us to put conflict and division aside. For at a time 
 when the economy is recovering significantly, it would do great 
 damage_if Australians do not work together to increase the level 
 of economic growth, to increase employment, to increase general 
 prosperity, and to establish conditions under which further tax 
 cuts can be possible.

 Because private enterprise is responding so strongly to the-- 
 incentives provided by Government policies, we are now seeing 
 a very broad-based recovery in the economy. Economic growth is 
 faster than it has been for years. Employment is increasing, 
 and unemployment is falling.: In April this year, unemployment 
 was at its lowest in four years, and youth unemployment dropped 
 substantially as part of this trend. All Australians want the 
 revival of employment to continue. It is vital as a way to 
 improve our standard of living, and in addition to that, all 
 Australians are keen that young people in particular should be 
 able to get jobs.

-I-do not believe tha anyone in this country-really wants to see 
 the improvements in our economy, and in the employment situation, 
 placed at risk. And surely the union movement, with__ts concern 
 for the welfare of its. members and potential members, cannot 
 want to impede economic recovery. All Australians are surely at 
 one in wanting the economy to continue to strengthen.

 The fact is, however, that industrial dislocation, and any 
 excessive pushing for wage increases outside the arbitration 
 system must be seen as putting the economy at risk, especially 
 where little or no account is taken of the capacity of industry 
 to pay. In particular, there is a well established link between 
 excessive wage increases and unemployment. The two are inseparable.


                           /2

              2


Part of the reason for the recent growth in employment is that 
Australian industry has come to be more competitive. This has been 
enabling it to sell more of its products, both at home and overseas. 
The quality of Australian goods is improving all the time. And 
the time is certainly well past when there was any reason to think 
that goods made overseas are likely to be better than Australian- 
made goods.

But industrial disruption and excessive wage rises certainly 
reduce the competitiveness of Australian industry. And in one 
way or another, this is damaging to all of us. If manufacturers 
cannot sell as much, they will not be able to employ as many 
people. Less production and fewer wage earners will undoubtedly 
lead to a situation in which overall prosperity in this country 
goes backwards rather than forwards.

The Arbitration Commission recently established some new wage 
fixation guidelines, which have been in operation for only a very 
short time. A large number of parties, including both the ACTU 
and the Government, made submissions to the inquiry conducted by 
the Commission. And it is surely now up to all parties to give the 
new guidelines a chance, and to see how satisfactory they prove to 
be. Wage fixing systems are probably never perfect, but it is surely 
reasonable to give a fair try to a new set of arrangements.

The_Government is well aware that there are certain difficulties 
and dissatisfactions with Australia's existing wage fixing system. Because 
of these feelings, the Government has recently decided to establish 
a broad ranging independent inquiry into wage determination and 
industrial relations in Australia. This inquiry will run concurrently 
with the new system of guidelines. The inquiry will take some 
eighteen months or so to complete, and it will be able to watch 
the new system in operation. I very much hope that all parties and 
organisations in Australia will approach this inquiry in a con- 
structive way.. For an inquiry such as this provides an opportunity 
for making the breakthroughs which so many of us would like to see, 
and which could have such a desirable impact on the industrial 
relations scene in Australia. It is my strong hope that nothing 
will be done to jeopardise the possible success of this inquiry, 
and I appeal to all parties to view it - and approach it - in a 
constructive way.

Mr Dolan and I will be having the first of the regular meetings 
between the Government and the ACTU next month. And there are 
obviously several matters which both of us will be wanting to 
raise at that meeting. It would be foolish to pretend that the 
issues are all easy ones. But the Government for its part will 
certainly be seeking constructive solutions that will be in the 
interests of all Australians.



            0000000

