<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1961 budget
Description: press statement
Date: 20/08/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PRESS STATEMENT                                                        a

                                                            August 20th,1961
                                          1961 BUDGET
                        Any Budget should attempt to do three things - maintain 
              stability throughout the economy; give aids to development and 
              progress where they are needed; and maintain justice between one 
              section of the community and another.
                        This Budget, in its efforts to achieve these three things
              is no exception.    I have often said at a time of inflation that   a 
              Government should budget for a surplus, that is, to collect more 
              moneys than it spends in any one year.
                        On the other hand, when there is slack in the economy which
              needs taking up as at present, the Government should budget for a 
              deficit and this the Government has done. Although the deficit 
              itself is small, about £16M., the increase in expenditure over last
              year is quite great - about k;1l M.    This increase has been made 
              possible without a large deficit because of estimates of much larger 
•             revenues. Extra money is being spent in the following directions.
              Increased payments and rates of benefit under national welfare will 
              cost nearly £2óM. more than last year, bringing the total to nearly 
              6360M. in a full year. Total expenditure on war and repatriation
              expenses is nearly £1I -M. more than last year, standing at just over 
              £102M. Payments to the States have increased by nearly £;32M.,21M. 
              of which was for general financial assistance, and 641.1. of which was
              for additional road expenditure.     About £2-M. on special grants  to 
              West Australia and i asmania and nearly £3M. for expansion of 
              University programs in the States.
                         In addition to these avenues, the Government is beginning
              to spend more money in the development of Northern Australia.
•             In assisting states to build what are being called the "beef" roads 
              L1M. has been allotted for this year which will go to Queensland
              and Western Australia.    The purpose of these roads is to enable 
              road transport to take beef out of difficult areas, where formerly 
              they had to walk. This should make it possible for fat bullocks 
              to arrive in better condition at the butcher and, alternatively, 
              it should make it possible to save animals in time of drought. 
              The Treasurer indicated that this initial âlM. is by no means the 
              end of Commonwealth expenditure in this field.
                         The Government is also in close consultation with the
              N.S.W., W.A. and S.A. Governments to enable development works on 
              coal ports and on rail standardization to be undertaken in these 
              States. These are matters that are regarded as important in 
              creating greater efficiency inside the country, also enabling our 
              coal ports to handle greatly increased export trade in col which 
              looks like becoming available.
                         In regard to the rail standardization program Victorians 
              should be particularly pleased that an additional £41. is being 
              provided by the Commonwealth for the standard gauge rail link

                                          2

             between Melbourne and Albury. It is hoped that construction will
             be completed this financial year. The advantages of this move 
             which were initiated by the Commonwealth are all too obvious. 
                      Money devoted to oil research will be increased by about
             70% to just over 4N. this year.  This is a most important item 
             when you have regard to the fact that discovery of commercial oil 
             in Australia would save this country well over Ll00M. in overseas 
             payments each year.
                      For some time the Government has been aware that the 
             housing industry needs more money to be put into it, and this has 
             been done by Commonwealth and State Savings Banks. The Treasurer 
             announced in addition that he had arranged for a further special 
             loan to go through the Commonwealth Savings Bank for this purpose. 
             It is also well known that some weeks ago the Minister for National 
             Development announced that the War Service Homes Division would 
             make finance available without any delay for ex-servicemen who 
             wished to build their own homes. The distinction between building 
•            a new home and buying an existing one was made in this provision 
             because it was specifically designed to give a stimulus to the
             building industry.  In addition to these measures, immediately 
             the Budget was introduced the Loan Housing Bill was also introduced 
             into the Parliament. This Bill will make nearly £;43M. available 
             to the States for housing purposes this year.
                        This is £5M. more than was advanced to the States under 
             the Commonwealth-States Housing Agreement last year. This is the 
             first grant under the proposed new Commonwealth-States Housing
             Agreement.   The past Commonwealth-States Housing Agreement required 
             that 30% of the funds available should be allocated to private home 
             builders mainly through Building Societies. This provision applies 
•            to the current grant. The remaining â30M. is available to State 
             Housing Commission Homes.
                         Up to the end of June, 1961, it is worth noting that 
             the Commonwealth has made available under Housing Agreements £415M. 
             to the States for home building.
                         There are one or two other small items which are of
             interest to those concerned. When the Commonwealth Development 
             Bank was established it had a capital of í616M. in addition to
             substantial reserves.  The Government realized,hoÙrever, that 
             if the Bank is to operate effectively it would need additional
             funds from time to time and therefore a further :5M. capital has
             been made over to the Bank. It should be recalled that so far 
             as country areas are concerned that the Bank's main function is 
             to assist small rural undertakings where finance is not normally 
             available from other sources and where there are good chances of 
             the enterprise being a success.
                          The Budget had some good news for people who wanted 
             to buy furniture or equipment for their homes. The sales tax on 
             all household goods and furniture is reduced from 8--,6 to 2--ió.

              This might not mean so much to people with an established home, 
              but for a young couple who are trying to build a home from scratch 
              the saving could be quite considerable.
                       The Treasurer also announced in his Budget speech that the 
              severe credit restrictions put on nearly a year ago were off
              except so far as speculative sections of the community are concerned. 
              He drew attention to the fact that our overseas balances were 
              strong and in fact our overseas reserves stand at a record level. 
              He recalled that the bad feature of the boom of 12 months ago, in 
              respect of speculation and inflation which were to some extent
              out of hand, had passed.  He said that one of the principal tasks 
              was now to get the unemployed resources in the community back to
              work.   The Budget, together with other measures that have been 
              taken over the last four months, particularly in relation to 
              housing and the relaxation of bank credit should substantially
              achieve this by the end of the year. I make no secret of the 
•             fact that unemployment in recent months has been higher than anyone 
              likes and I believe the Budget will do much to correct this position.
                       The additional £118M. expenditure has been carefully
              spread throughout the country and throughout different sections of
              the community.  The States have more money.  There is more money
              for roads and a lot more for housing. Incentive to certain 
              industries is given by the reduced sales tax, social welfare and
              repatriation payments are higher. All this should have a 
              stimulating effect.

