<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry re-organisation
Description: press statement
Date: 16/12/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATENENT:

 NiA.LCOLM FRASER:

                                                       December 16th,1962

                         WOOL INDUSTRY RE-ORGANIZATION


              Last week I described the Wool Industry Bill and the organization 
 that has been established to place the control of the Australian wool industry 
 in the hands of woolgrowers where it rightly belongs. Although I indicated 
 the keenest support for the new organization, I also indicated that the composition 
 of the Conference was not ideal because the A.P.P.U. had not received a place on
 it.   I accepted this position with the greatest reluctance, as did other members 
 like Dan Mackinnon, Jim Forbes, Bert Kelly, Alec. Buchanan, to name but a few. 
 We accepted it because the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation and 
 the Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council had threatened to walk off the 
 Conference if the A.P.P.U. were given even token representation on the Conference. 
 I believed and still believe this to be an unreasonable attitude on behalf of the 
 major organizations. Traditiohally, they have been the only two organizations 
 recognised in Government legislation because they were first on the scene and were 
 taken to represent the interests of the wool industry.

              Quite frankly, I was not prepared to call their bluff - if it was 
 a bluff. It would have delayed getting this new organization into being, 
 possibly for a year or more than a year. If the leaders of the Australian Wool 
 and Meat Producers' Federation meant what they said, they may have destroyed the 
 organization entirely. The industry urgently needs the organization and the 
 strength that it will give the industry] Therefore, although we were most 
 concerned that the A.P.P.U. should be represented, I and my colleagues decided 
 that the legislation would have to be accepted but that every pressure should be 
 brought upon the two organizations to admit the A.P.P.U. to the Conference.

              Let me briefly describe what has gone on about these negotiations. 
 Firstly, we supported the claims of the A.P.P.U. for representation on the 
 Conference because it has 25,000 woolgrower members ih the States of Victoria,
 Tasmania, New South Wales and South Australia. It is a Federal organization. 
 While it is the newer organization in the field, its leadership has shown an 
 intelligent understanding of the Wool Industry's problems. The Union's leadership 
 has shown itself fully equipped.to take a part in the forum of the nation's great- 
 est industry.

             The Government Members' I1ool Committee had discussions with the 
 Chairman of the Australian Woolgrowers and Graziers' Council, the President of 
 the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation, and with the leaders of the
A.P.P.U.     We questioned the leaders of the two former organizations closely 
 concerning the A.P.P.U. membership on the Conference.. They were implacable in
 defence of their decision.  When it was pointed out to the President of the 
Federation that the arguments he was using against the A.P.P.U. were very similar 
 to the arguments that the Graziers once used against the Federation 25 or 30 years 
 ago, he indicated to us that that was different. The Federation was now in and
 the Union was not.  We put it to him and we believed that the Union has 
maintained its 25,000 membership for the simple reason that these particular 
 growers are not satisfied with the leadership shown by either the Graziers' or
 the Federation.  Indeed, this was the reason for the Federation's own birth 
many years ago because,formerly, the Graziers were the only people in the field.

             The Union's membership has maintained loyalty to its organization. 
Its strength can be judged from the fact that there are 43,000 members of the 
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation and 22,000 or 23,000 graziers 
throughout the whole of Australia.
                two
             The/organizations that have formed the Wool Industry Conference to 
manage the affairs of the industry have left the constitution of their Conference 
wide enough to include other organizations at some future time. I have read 
these clauses in the constitution of this Conference and I believe the A.P.P.U.


                                                                    /2.

                                    2 -

conforms to the requirements that are put forward. I hope the leaders of the 
A.P.P.U. will therefore begin to set out their claim to membership of the 
Conference.

       It may be said that the Government should have made this Conference a 
statutory body and as such, the Government would then only have to say there 
will be 25 graziers, 25 Federation people and a certain number of A.P.P.U. men 
on the Conference. This is true, but I have already said that the two en- 
trenched organizations had threateed to walk off the Conference if the Govern-
ment took this course.   In the interests of the Wool Industry in its fight 
to maintain and preserve world markets and in its fight to improve the marketing
system, it was vital that this legislation be passed before Christmas.  Indeed,
the A..P..P.U. recognised this   In a statement recently issued by the Federal 
President, Mr, Heffernan said that the well being of the wool industry is of 
paramount importance and, with this thought in mind, the A.P.P.U. recognised 
that any action taken by the Union that would delay setting up the Wool Board 
would not be in the best interests of Australian Woolgrowers. He went on to 
say that the Union was fully aware of its responsibility towards its members 
and would continue to press strongly for membership of the Wool Industry 
Conference at the earliest opportunity by every means at its disposal.

       This statement has been commended by the Minister for Primary Industry 
and by the Minister for Trade. They have both drawn attention to the fact 
that the Uhion has placed the wool industry first in its thinking. This has 
shown a responsibility to the industry as a whole which should net be lost upon 
the other organizations. By this act alone and the manner of their acceptance 
of the present position the Union has proved the justness of its claim to 
membership of the Conference.

       However, neither the Government nor the other most concerned in this 
issue were prepared to run the risk of destroying the whole organization whf.cr
had taken so long to come into being:    In this context we must remember that 
only a year ago the Graziers and the Federation did not get along too well to-
gether.    Now, at the top level, they are co-operating very well and work`.ng 
in the interests of the industry. They both put the view that if you injected 
a third party, dissension could be caused. However, if they get used to work- 
ing together and can develop a greater basis of trust, then they may be more 
ready to accept A.P.P.U. membership on the Conference at some future stage. 
They have left their constitution wide enough to accept them and I am quite 
certain that the Union will put their intentions in this matter to the test.

       It is not much consolation to the loyal and energetic members of the 
A.P.P.U.. to say to them that it is always difficult for newcomers to break 
through in a field of this kind but it is still true that if their leadership 
continues in the way that it has in recent years and if they maintain their 
membership and their vigour, I believe that they must achieve a place on the 
Conference.

       The Government has made it quite clear that they want to see them on the 
Conference. The Government was not prepared to dictate to the industry for 
fear of the reactions of the other organizations and because it is not the
Government's policy to dictate to industries.  I have said before that there 
are growers who when they want something done would like a Government to step 
forward and tell the industry what to do. However, if you once set a pre- 
cedent of dictation the next time the Government may be dictating something 
that the industry as a whole does not want and this would not be so good. 
Growers as a whole would not accept this. However, the Government's powere 
of persuasion will, I am sure, be directed towards placing the Union on the 
Conference.

       The Prime Minister himself..had a meeting with all the organizational
leaders, including the Union's leaders, to try and achieve this end.  Present 
efforts have not succeeded but continued pressure may carry results. The failure 
of the two major woolgrowing organizations to recognise even a token number of 
Union members on the Conference is the only blot on a magnificent piece of 
legislation which has taken the wool industry further along the road to a good 
and successful organization than any other single act.

