<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government, economy
Description: electoral talk
Date: 14/09/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Leader of the Opposition









                                      For Sunday 14th September, 1975 3HA 
  ELECTORAL TALK                      & Thursday 18th September, 1975 3YB







  THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER




  There are two sections of the community who are playing very important 
  roles in the Government's economic strategy.



   It is the same sort of role as played by a laboratory rabbit.


  Without this humble contributor to medical research, scientists would

  never find out if the wonder drug worked. But nobody asks him if he 

  wants to be sacrificed in the cause of human health.


  And nobody in this Government has asked the private sector and the 
  beef grower whether they want to be sacrificed as the Government 

  experiments with the nation's economic health.


  That however is what is happening.


  The Government has squibbed the wages issue. It is not taking on

  the union leaderships in defence of its solution to wage cost pressures, 
  which is wage indexation.


  It is not even putting a whole-hearted public case against wage rises 

  outside the indexation framework.


  It is letting the number of unemployed build up. The effect must be to
  intimidate the trade union movement, and cause union leaders to moderate 

  the demands they make on behalf of their members.


  The Minister for Labour, Senator McClelland, told Parliament this week 

  that there would still be a quarter of a million people out of work by 
  the middle of the year.


  And he admitted that in January when 240,000 school leavers enter the 

  work force, the number would be 400,000.


  It would be surprising if these estimates are not merely the best end 
  of a range.


  Senator McClelland might have been more accurate if he had admitted 

  that with luck, the number of unemployed would be only 400,000 in 
  January and with luck it might be only 250,000 in June.



  Our economic advisors warned us that there could be 500,000 out of 
  work in the first part of next year.







Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600

ELECTORAL TALK                 -2-            14/9/75 : 18/9/75

With unemployment, in seasonally adjusted figures, now at just 
under 300,000, this must be a real danger.

It is tragic that the Government's mishandling of its finances has
forced it to abandon its regional employment programme. It has 
run out of money for this form of welfare, and just as it is in 
trouble financing Medibank.

This is an aspect of the present situation that has disturbed the 
President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Mr. Hawke.

He warned the Government that if unemployment was increasing
endlessly, the very fabric of society was going to be brought into 
question, and he called on the government to adjust its thinking on 
the Regional Employment Scheme.

The other laboratory bunny in the Government's economic experiment 
is the primary producer - the person who grows the food.

While the incomes of those with jobs go up, the income of farmers, 
like revenues in the private sector, goes down.

The price of meat to consumers has handly gone down. Most of the
benefit from the lower price for beef on the hoof which farmers 
receive is absorbed in handling costs before it reaches the shop.

Over the past year, the consumer price index has risen by 16.9 per cent 
but with food excluded, the index has gone up 20.5 per cent.

That means that steady or falling food prices have made inflation 
easier to bear for everybody except those who produce the food.

It has helped take some of the pressure off the demand for higher 
wages.

And it has been done by a government which begrudges the food producers 
a subsidy for the fertiliser they spread on their farms and which the 
Industries Assistance Commission says should be restored.

If there is a moderation in the consumer price index for the September 
quarter of this year, it is going to be because of very depressed food 
prices.

If this does occur, we can expect to see the Government claiming that it
is starting to get on top of inflation.  But any such moderation would 
be at the expense of tens of thousands of Australian farmers.

The Opposition agrees with the Treasurer that the primary economic 
target is inflation.

But it believes the way to beat inflation is by getting the economy 
working, and by using the tax system to take the heat out of wage demands.

ELECTORAL TALK -3-    14/9/75 : 18/9/75


The Government is instead profiting from unemployment and from the 
increasing financial difficulties of the rural sector.




              ;A: **

