<!--start metadata-->
Title: Election as leader of the Liberal Party and Opposition
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 30/03/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


THE HON. MALCOLM.FRASER, M.P. Sundays 30th March, :311A
RADIO BROADCAST               Thursday, 3rd April, 3YB



This is my first opportunity to speak to you since being 
elected Leader of the Parliamentary Liberal Party and, hence, 
Leader of the Oppb.sition in the Federal Parliament.

T am honoured to have been elected to this impt position
by my colleagues and I am also pleased for the recognition 
that it brings to our electorate of Wannon.

The task we have ahead is great and of vital importance for 
the way of life we cherish and which is now under challenge
from the 0,a0404kiat philosophies of the Labor Government.

The Liberal Country Party coalition must regain the Government 
of this nation at the next elections.

This is the over-riding task facing all of us who value the 
Liberal belief of freedom for the individual, opportunities 
for all people, and concern for the disadvantaged in our society.

The Shadow Ministry will provide strong but const 4uct Lw, oppc i,tion
to the Labor Government and whenever the next election occurs,
we will present a strong alternative to the Labor Government.
There is a distinct choice for the people of Australia between
the eruabing, all-powerful centralism So firmly entrenched
  -t Laboaa v anent, and the Liberal alternative of freedom,
opportunity and concern.

But, as I said, soon after taking up the position of Leader,
I do not wish to speculate about the date of an early election.

As a general principle, killailammwiellet the right to govern must 
be given to that Party which is returned to power with the 
majority in the Lower House, the House of Representatives. 
A majority in the Senate does not automatically bring with

it a right to obstruct Government.

For this reason, the Labor Party £correct.-in,expecting--that 
it-will..govern, 'unhindered. by the-.Senate, .for-its-full-term - 
just..as we.wouldtexpect.to-govern when returned'with-a majority 
in the House of Representatives...

This means that an early, or mid-term, election is unlikely unless. 
Labor attémpts.,to pass-legislation of a most reprehensible 
nature., 4:.4

It is ironic that in their preparations for an election, the 
Labor Party has announced a major campaign to solicit funds


Not content with the forced campaign funds which come from 
the Trade Union movement, the Labor Party believes it is 
also entitled to support from private enterprise, that very 
sector which has been brought to its knees by the economic 
mismanagement pf„.the Labor Government.

All of a sudden, we are told that the private enterprise sector 
of our economy is, after all, important and must be encouraged.

Make no mistake - this is merely a change of tactics, not a 
change of philosophy.

The Cairns/Whitlam philosophy is to cooperate with private 
enterprise to the minimum extent necessary to ensure Labor's 
survival.

Their purpose is still to bury private enterprise, but in the 
slightly longer term. The survival of many businesses meanwhile, 
large or small, is imperilled while inflation runs rampant, 
wages outstrip productivity by an enormous degree, and the

                       - 4 •-


I appreciate greatly the support that has come to me as a
result of my election as Leader, especially the support
from the people in Wannon. Whatever my national responsibilities,
my concern for the people of this electorate remains of
paramount importance.

