<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural assistance
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 3/11/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL STATEMENT EMBARGO 6000 pomo
                         Sunday, Novo3

       The Hon. Member for Wannon - MALCOLM FRASER 
       Electoral Radio Talk


Last week the Prime Minister made a speech before the Australian 
Farmers' Federation Canberra meeting, In that speech the Prime 
Minister said that his Government's outlay on rural assistance 
totalled $488,000,000. He implied this was an all time record.

The Prime Minister must have been very badly advised because that 
figure of $488,000,000 includes at least $200,000,000 which the 
farmers themselves paid by way of a levy on their products. That 
brings the government's outlay to about $280,000,000.

If we take present money values the last outlay of the Liberal 
Country Party government would have totalled $350,000,000, That 
indicates the cut in subsidies and in support as a result of this 
government's policies.
Furthermore the revaluations upwards which had totalled about 30% 
before the small devaluation a few weeks ago would have denied 
farmers hundreds of millions of dollars in income earned from 
overseas.
This speech to the :Farmers' Federation was one in which he was 
seeking to woo rural producers - he didn't say we have never had 
it so good again but he tried to emphasise his government's con- 
cern and interest in the farming and rural communities.

He indicated that there was a general reference to the Industries 
Assistance Commission designed to achieve more stable farm incomes. 
What is needed however, is assistance now m not in two or three 
years time after that commission has reported and after many 
farmers might well have been bankrupted.

Three items of coalition policy are well worth remembering
1) the continuation of the superphosphate subsidy for at least three 
years, 2) the essential establishment of a special rural bank for 
long term credit for the purchase of land, or of a producers' equip- 
ment so that farmers would not have to pay high purchase rates for 
their essential machinary and 3) the introduction of a farm income 
reserve fund which would have been open to all farmers and which 
would have made it possible for them to moderate seasonal changes 
in income.

If any of you would want to look in more detail at the precise pol- 
icies of the coalition I have copies available.

                                                          2,

NEAT

During the last week I have conducted a running argument with the 
Minister for Labour over the new training scheme, I have emphas- 
ised for over 12 months that I am very much in favour of an imag- 
inative and far reaching re-training scheme which especially pro- 
vides help to those who may be unemployed or who find it difficult 
to find a job, to those who missed out on training earlier in life 
and might want to seek an opportunity. But this re-training scheme 
appears open to a number of abuses.

Originally Commonwealth Employment Service Officers were told the 
allowances were tax free. This was then contradicted. Because 
the allowances are generous and subject to no means test they ought 
to be taxable and they now will be,

I have had disturbing reports however, from some officers that a 
very high proportion of those applying are not in fact out of work, 
Some are students who had done some years work before becoming a 
student and others could be people taking advantage of the scheme 
with no real intention of entering the workforce.

The public discussion that has occurred will, I am sure, lead to 
a revision of the rules and bring more sense into the schemes

I am disturbed, however, because the scheme would seem to be weighted 
in favour of white collar workers and against blue collar workers. 
These are more likely to be in need of re-training as a result of 
the current economic position.

There are two things that may make it difficult for blue collar 
workers to be given an equal opportunity under the scheme. Firstly, 
there are not very many instances where training of a blue collar 
kind is available on a full time basis and many trade unions still 
have objections to adult apprenticeship, This creates a barrier 
which it is difficult to overcome but to which the Minister ought 
to give his attention.

As a result the opportunities available for blue collar workers are 
largely opportunities on the job in factories. At a period of fall- 
ing employment there are not too many firms who want to take on add- 
itional people for training. That further lessens the opportun- 
ities.

In addition to this there is discrimination concerning the time of
training for white collar people. Employment officers can approve 
training up to the length of an authorised course and that could 
be for some years providing the applicant had previously been in 
employment for an equal number of years.              00/3

                             30


In other words, if a person had been in work for three years he 
could receive re-training for three years.

On the other hand Employment officers are only allowed to approve 
six months on the job training for blue collar people. If addit- 
ional periods are required it has to be approved by a higher auth- 
ority in the department.

At the moment I am enquiring to see whether the scheme will be 
available for people who want to learn a job on farms. I hope it 
will, otherwise it is plainly discriminatory against a section of 
the community.

One of the things that concerns me most about the scheme however, 
is that it appears that most of the initial applicants have not 
been unemployed. They have in fact been people in jobs, in full 
time education who saw an opportunity open to them.

Finally, the Prime Minister in his speech to the Farmers said

"I want to convince you that the Australian Government has your in- 
terests truly at heart, and that your future - given goodwill and 
good sense - is a bright one."

Is that another way of saying we have never had it so good.

