<!--start metadata-->
Title: End of Autumn session
Description: press statement
Date: 27/05/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:

MÀLCOLM FRASER:

                                                    May 27th, 1962


                          END OF AUTUMN SESSION

            Last week, the autumn session of Parliament ended. After the 
first few weeks of uncertainly, the Parliament settled down to its normal 
routine in the conduct of its business. I say the first few weeks of 
uncertainty because, to start with, there was a threatened Opposition censure 
motion and everyone was wondering what would happen as a result. The censure 
motion came and it was then defeated by the Government's narrow majority of 
one without the Speaker voting.

           After the censure motion the attack on the Government was very 
greatly reduced and now there are many observers who believe the Parliament 
might well go its full term. This would be by no means unique. As I 
pointed out before, several Governments have survived in Australia with a 
majority of one or two and while you maintain that majority it is as
effective as a majority of ten or fifteen even if it is uncomfortable from 
the Government's point of view. Of course, there can always be accidents. 
A person can become sick and unable to attend and it would never be possible 
to predict what might happen under such circumstances.

           In the last weeks of the session, the Government's majorities 
in divisions have been raised to three, to four, to five and in this 
Parliament we regard a majority of five in a division as a large majority. 
It just shows how your thinking alters, because in the last Parliament if 
our majority in a division was reduced to as little as ten or twelve we 
thought something was very wrong.




                  PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT OVERSEAS

           Two or three matters of importance occurred in the last week. 
The Prime Minister announced that he is going to go abroad to speak to 
President Kennedy and Prime Minister MacMi1?'n of the United Kingdom 
concerning the problems that will arise for Australia if the United Kingdom 
should enter the Common Market. This is in accordance with the Government's 
policy of doing everything possible to protect and safeguard the interests of 
our own exporters.

           In addition to these informal meetings that will be held the 
Prime Minister will, of course, have to be away in September for the 
official Prime Ministers' Conference, by which time England's course and 
decisions may be known. In addition to this, because the Common Market 
presents Australia with problems which may be greater than any that have 
ever arisen in peace-time, the Government feels that the Leaders of the 
Opposition should be enabled to go abroad to examine the matter for them-
selves at first hand. Australia's policy in regard to a matter as 
important as this should be bi-partisan. Both political parties should - 
and I believe are - hoping for the same results.

           As I understand it , Mr. Whitlam and Senator McKenna of the 
Opposition will be going abroad in this coming recess, and Mr. Calwell, 
Mr. Crean and Mr. Pollard will go abroad in September. Thus, the Opposition 
Leaders will have the opportunity to learn Australia's problems at first hand. 
As a result, when there are debates in Parliament their criticisms should be 
more constructive than they might otherwise have been.

           While they are abroad, the Australian Government will do every- 
thing possible to make it easy for Opposition Leaders to meet the appropriate 
people in England or in European countries to which they would like to go. 
The Opposition Leaders will be completely independent vale they are abroad

                                                              /2.

and able to do what they want. They would be in no way attached to the 



official visits of the Prime Minister. That is the offer that the Government 



has made and which has been accepted by the Opposition. This offer is 



nearly unique in Australian political history although, I think, during the 



formative years of the United Nations, two Opposition Members did go abroad 



with the official governmental delegation. This action may lead to a basis 



of co-operation between the Government and the Opposition which could 



ultimately lead to better debates and more constructive proposals being put 



to the Parliament. When I say co-operation, I do not mean that the vigour 



and the bluntness of Australian politics will be in any way diminished. 



Certainly it will not.






















                             SOUTH-EAST AS ASIA
                             _.~.~.











                   Other matters of great national importance have arisen in 



this last week. Despite the intensive efforts of diplomats to achieve some 



degree of stability in Laos, the Communists appear to be renewing their



military offensive in that country.  As I understand the problem. there 



had previously been agreement that the three Princes oP Laos, ohe of whom is 



a Communist, one of whom is a neutralist and one of whom is anti-Communist, 



were to form a neutral government and that foreign military forces of all



kinds were to be withdrawn.   I understand again that matters had been 



deadlocked because the three Princes had been unable to form an adequato



government.   In this context, the Communists recently renewed their offensive 



and have captured further areas of Laos. Thus, there is not only a threat 



to Laos. There is a threat to the whole of Sc'ith East Asia.







                   The next country concerned is Thailand with its border 



adjacent to Laos. Thailand is a member of SEATO and is bitterly anti-



Communist and anti-Chinese.   2,000 years ago the Thai people fled from 



China proper and established themselves in their present country. They 



travelled south at that time to escape Chinese domination. They would relish 



Chinese domination no more now than they did then but they cannot travel 



further south because it would mean going into the sea.








                   It is most, important that the Communist advance in this



part of South East Asia shall be stopped. If Laos goes, Thailand will be 



open to danger because of her long adjacent boundaries with a Communist 



country. In addition, South Vietnam, the country that has for years been 



waging a war against Communist guerrillas much in the same that Malaya had 



to do some years ago would be open to further danger. At the moment, South 



Vietnam poly has a short boundary adjacent to a Communist-held country, If 



.Taos becomes Communist there will be hundreds of miles of country difficult 



to police, difficult to patrol, adjacent to South Vietnam but under Communist 



control,








                   The one thing that is likely to avert a conflict in this 



area is the obvious and clear determination of America and the SEATO powers 



to resist Communist aggression. If the Communists for one moment feel that 



we will not fight to save a country from Communism then they will attack that 



country.








                   It is my belief that the Communists have eased tensions 



in Berlin because the United Kingdom and the United States made it quite 



clear that they were not going to be forced out of West Berlin, and made it 



quite clear that if the Russians tried to force them out the result would 



probably be a nuclear conflict. In the result, the tensions over Berlin 



have become reduced, because the Russians know as well as we that there will 



be no winners in a war involving nuclear weapons,












                                                                  /3.

•

                                           3    -

                                SATELLITE TRACKING STATION


                    Another minor matter occurred which is of great significance 
     for Australia and which is important. The Prime Minister has announced that 
     the United States is going to construct a satellite tracking station in Western 
     Australia . This will gain much valuable knowledge of satellites which are put 
     into space for various purposes. The construction of the station will cost
     £33M.    In addition, the construction of homes and shops and facilities for
     the technicians involved will involve a similar amount.   The station has been 
     planned for construction at a place where nothing at present exists.

                    The Australian taxpayer need have no fear that this will involve 
     him in any expense because the United States Government is going to pay the full 
     cost of this tracking station.

                    When the station is operation it will make it possible to obtain 
     greater knowledge of space which we all hope can be used for purely peaceful 
     purposes.

