<!--start metadata-->
Title: Federal election
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 12/11/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                      3HA Sunday, 12 November 
                      3YB Thursday, 16 November 
    BROADCAST         3LK Wednesday, 15 November


        Elections are always important times, and the forthcoming 
    Federal election is no exception. But for people in country 
    areas, the man on the land and those whose livings are involved 
    with primary production, this election is critical. In a very 
    few minutes, I want to outline the achievements of the Government 
    in rural matters and the future action to which we are committed.

        Underlying the whole issue of rural policy and all the 
    arguments that rage around it, is the basic fact that the 
    Liberal-Country Party Government understands rural industries. 
    In the Government, there are a considerable number of people - 
    and I'm one of them - not only representing country electorates 
    but also involved in primary production.

        Let me start with wool. Last year, the wool industry 
    was verging on collapse - I don't think anyone would doubt that. 
    Looking back from this distance, I also don't believe anyone could 
    doubt the effectiveness of the role the Commonwealth Government 
    played in averting that collapse. We acted decisively with the 
    wool deficiency payments scheme and with the establishment of the 
    Australian Wool Commission, thereby keeping both the return to the 
    grower and the price at auction above disaster levels.
•
        The Government took that step knowing only too well that 
    if prices did not improve, it could have cost more than $200 
    million to support the industry.

        To some of us, it has been clear for a considerable 
    length of time that the method of wool marketing had to be reformed, 
    and we have been working towards that. This year, the Government 
    acted in legislating for the establishment of an Australian Wool 
    Marketing Corporation. The Corporation is not a vague promise - 
    it is being set up now and has the support of growers through the 
    Australian Wool Industry Conference. Considering the controversy 
    that has surrounded wool marketing reform, it was this support of 
    the Australian Wool Industry Conference executive that I found the 
    most gratifying.

                             .../2

                        - 2 -


            The new corporation will be empowered to recommend to the 
     Government and the Australian Wool Industry Conference any changes 
     considered necessary in the marketing arrangements. As the Minister 
     for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair, said when he introduced the 
     legislation into Parliament a few weeks ago, such marketing changes 
     include the submission of a detailed plan for a compulsory acquisition 
     scheme.


            I should add that this season's vastly improved wool 
     prices have not lulled the Government into thinking again about 
     wool marketing reform, and I hope that the industry doesn't lose 
     its enthusiasm. The very fact that prices can fluctuate so wildly
•    in such a relatively short time is an excellent reason for us to 
     press on with reforms to avoid the boom-bust situations that wool 
     has known in the past, usually to the producer's cost.


            In other areas of primary production, the Government has 
     acted positively and in close liaison with the industries. Dairying 
     is one case. For dairying, we are committed to continue our
     financial support.


            More broadly, the Commonwealth has taken positive action
     in the provision of rural credit. We are currently providing 
     $115 million to the States for rural reconstruction.


•           Apart from that, we realised the immediate need for 
     greater access by primary producers to long term loans, and we acted 
     to meet that need. Arrangements were made between the Government, 
     Reserve Bank and the Trading Banks under which banks will increase 
     the amount of long term borrowing from the Farm Development Loan 
     Funds by $65 million. The extra finance will be available for 
     terms of up to 30 years and for a wider range of purposes than 
     previously. This finance has been provided in this way in part at 
     least because it was not possible to legislate in this session, and 
     we wanted the proposal to have immediate effect.


            Of course, the Government will proceed with an examination 
     of proposals to create a new institution for the provision of such 
     finance.



                                              .../3

               -3



        In other ways, the Government has demonstrated a concern 
   for the country way of life. Rural employment grants are being 
   provided at the rate of $42 million a month to enable Government 
   and semi-Government authorities to keep as many people as possible 
   on their payrolls in country areas.

        The establishment of a National Urban and Regional 
   Development Authority will inject action into decentralisation in 
   co-operation with the States and local authorities. For too long, 
   people have been talking decentralisation without doing anything 
   much about it. The new authority will select potential growth 
   centres away from the big capital cities, and aim to have development 
   concentrated there.

        Tangible measures such as the doubling of subsidies to 
   country employers for the new apprentices they employ, show that 
   the Commonwealth means business in easing the pressures of big 
   city life and at the same time maintaining and enriching country 
   living for those of us who choose it.

        All these things indicate an understanding of the problems 
   of the primary producer and of those who live in country areas and 
   a willingness to tackle those problems and to look to the future.

        There'll always be differences of opinion about the best 
•  way to deal with these matters. But a Government which is in
   touch with the rural community and knows what country people want 
   is more likely to produce results. The present Government has done 
   that and is doing it. The results are not vague proposals, but 
   firm and positive action in the best interests of the country
   people of Australia.



              .. .. .. .. ..

   Further information: Collin Myers, Canberra 733261

