<!--start metadata-->
Title: Bass by-election, Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 15/06/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL TALK      For Sunday 15 June 1975
                    & Thursday 19 June 1975



THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER


The election in Bass which takes place later this month is an 
opportunity for the people of Northern Tasmanian electorate to 
give a lead to all Australians.

Over the last 2i years we have seen economic mismanagement and 
inefficiency by the Government develop into unemployment, inflation, 
industrial unrest, and interest rates at record levels.

These problems affect Bass and the people of Launceston, Scottsdale, 
and St. Helens, as much as they affect all other Australians.

There is unemployment in Bass in the textile industry, just as 
there is unemployment in the textile and clothing industry on the 
mainland.

There is unemployment in engineering and manufacturing industry, 
just as there is on the mainland.

There is economic depression among farmers in Northern Tasmania 
just as there is in the rest of that state and in the rural areas 
on the mainland.

I have just spent two days in Bass and I will be going back again 
next week and the following week to tell people there that they 
will have the chance to vote against the Government and against 
the Prime Minister, who is responsible for this state of affairs.

The Prime Minister, a few days ago, claimed that Australians had 
never been more prosperous.

Australians know that the dollars in their weekly pay packet have 
never bought less and that the taxation which is deducted before 
they see it has never been higher.

They also know that the Prime Minister of Australia cannot accept 
responsibility when things go wrong by blaming his underlings for 
the mismanagement over which he presides.


COLLAPSE AND DECAY
There has been evidence this week of the collapse and decay which 
afflicts this Government.

Most alarming of all, it is spreading further through the public 
service.

The Government has much to answer for over its handling of the 
bureaucracy.

At the beginning, it experimented in industrial relations by giving 
the public service better terms and conditions than the rest of the 
community.

                            /2

The public service was one of the first of the Government's scape- 
goats for the mistakes which it made.

While their salaries were being jumped ahead of those of other 
Australians, they were being abused for allegedly inadequate 
economic statistics and for allegedly providing the wrong sort of 
advice.

Now the Government is trying to fasten on the Treasury as much of 
the blame as it can for the developing scandal over the Government's 
petro-dollar loan raising activities in the Middle East.


CONNOR'S INFLUENCE
The Deputy Prime Minister, Dr. Cairns, has been sacked as Treasurer, 
not for his handling of the economy, but because of his unorthodox 
attempts to borrow money abroad, using a private intermediary with 
whom he has been friendly.

Both Dr. Cairns and now the Prime Minister appear to be aiming at 
the head of the Treasury, Sir Frederick Wheeler, as their next 
target in this affair.

The question that needs to be asked is why the Prime Minister wants 
to limit the enquiry which he has grudgingly promised into these 
matters.

Is it to protect the Minister for Minerals & Energy, Mr. Connor, 
who survived the blood letting when other senior ministers who have 
not succeeded in their portfolios were downgraded by the Prime 
Minister.

The first of the Arab Oil Loans to come to public attention were
those which Mr. Connor was trying to raise, also through an 
unorthodox private intermediary.

What hold does the Minister for Minerals & Energy have over the 
Prime Minister, which not only keeps him immune from the fate which 
Dr. Cairns suffered, but which also permits him to go ahead with 
sterile empire building.

Since Mr. Connor made himself high priest over the nation's resources 
of oil and minerals exploration has come to a standstill and sales 
contracts have been switched by the Japanese to Brazil and Swaziland.

The latest coup in the Labor Government's favourite sport of political 
infighting is the announced decision that the 500 scientists and
other staff from the C.S.I.R.O. should be taken over by the Department 
of Minerals & Energy.

The C.S.I.R.O. is one of the world's great scientific institutions.

Those divisions concerned with solar energy and minerals research 
are now to become political footballs under Mr. Connor's immediate 
and unpredictable control.

How is Mr. Connor able to exercise this sort of influence on
Mr. Whitlam at the expense of Australia's mineral development, at 
the expense of Australia's reputation abroad, and at the expense of 
the Treasury and the C.S.I.R.O.

                             /3

                              3•


These are the questions that need to be answered, and by something 
better than the departmental enquiry which the Prime Minister is 
offering.

Nothing is more certain than that we are going to hear more about 
Mr. Connor's loan raising activities and those also of Dr. Cairns, 
and more about the Government's assault on the Treasury, the 
C.S.I.R.O. and the Public Service.






























































                                r

