<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth's role in education
Description: For press
Date: 11/04/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


~J


               FOR PRESS


                                                COMMONWEALTH'S ROLE IN EDUCATION


                            The Commonwealth's spending on education has risen sharply in 
               recent years, and it is likely that the trend of increasing expenditure 
               would continue, the Minister for Education and Science, Mr. Malcolm 
               Fraser, said today.

                            He said in the last five years Commonwealth expenditure on 
               education had risen by over 210 per cent and this year the Government 
               would devote more than $210 million to education.

                            Mr. Fraser was addressing the -±a!!!r___ 
               ,g _f_~.r.~•i lA ~n•~..~ira~t,r , t~•• ) 1(l         o,       S7- r o.. r            O -V -One,               1_. ^ be_ rc,L1
                   ctc~~, . Qr^ i~~~act.
                            He said the potential of young Australians had to be translated 
               through education into the skills and abilities required to develop the 
               nation and to enable individuals to lead the fullest possible life.

                            To do this the Commonwealth had entered into a partnership with the 
               States and had launched special programmes to improve the quality and 
               quantity of education.

                            The Commonwealth was giving massive financial support to the 
               universities and the colleges of advanced education, and had allocated an 
               unmatched $24 million for building of teachers' colleges in the States, 
               which would result in a further 5,000 places for student teachers.

                            It was paying for a wide range of Commonwealth secondary and 
               tertiary scholarships which , without any increase in the number of 
               scholarships would cost about $35 million by 1971-72.

                            To lift the quality of education the Commonwealth was continuing 
               with its successful schemes for technical training and for science 
               laboratories in all secondary schools.

                            To this end also the Commonwealth had introduced its $27 million 
               scheme for libraries in Government and independent schools throughout 
               Australia.

              2.


   Together, $177 million had already been committed to these three 
programmes up to 1971.

   Under the technical training scheme thousands of Australians were 
receiving training in trade and certificate courses in technical and 
agricultural colleges and trade schools to equip them for a wide range 
of tasks in our work force.

   The development of Australia called for the marshalling of forces 
and skills to ensure we maintain and improve our position in this age 
of science and technology.

   The programme for science laboratories had improved the quality 
of science instruction in government and independent schools, Mr. Fraser said.

   The higher quality of training in secondary schools would enable 
better use to be taken of the increasing university facilities and so help 
in the task of providing the increasing number of well trained scientists 
needed for Australia's future development.

   It was hoped that the libraries programme would achieve in other 
disciplines what the science laboratories programme is achieving in its 
field.

   Mr. Fraser said the Federal Government had made its attitude 
perfectly clear on the subject of government aid to independent schools.

   There were two basic objectives. One was to enable the 
independent schools to improve the quality of their education step by step 
with the improvement of quality of education in the government schools.

   Secondly, he hoped that the situation would eventually be reached 
in which independent schools — by their own efforts and coupled with 
either State or Federal Government support — would be able to expand 
and continue to supply the educational needs of those who prefer to send 
their children to an independent school.

             3.


   The Commonwealth had established the schemes for science 
laboratories and libraries in both independent and government secondary 
schools.

   Mr. Fraser said, "We can see no justice in the old view that says 
that it is all right to support to the full education for three-quarters 
of the population but then nothing should be done for the remaining 
quarter because they go to trouble and expense to supply their own 
educational needs.

   "I can see no justice and equity in that view.

   "I believe the dual system - the government system and the independent 
system operating side by side - adds to the value and quality of education."

   Mr. Fraser said some time ago he welcomed an announcement by the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Whitlam, that he had pledged his own Party's 
support to State aid at a gathering of Catholic parents in Sydney.

   Mr.Whitlam had mentioned emergency grants of some millions of 
dollars for schools and said that they would provide this if they won an 
election.

   Mr. Fraser said he basically welcomed this statement by Mr. Whitlam 
because he welcomes any reduction in the opposition to aid to independent 
schools.

   He believed it would be a good day for Australia when this 
opposition faded and when there could be full recognition of the right of 
independent schools for support.

   If the independent system were to collapse, the greater numbers of 
children seeking places in government schools would involve much higher 
taxes and much larger sums of money to provide for them.

   But it was unfortunately clear that there was not yet any general 
agreement among Mr. Whitlam's followers in relation to support for the
independent schools.

             4.


   During a vote in the Senate recently a great deal of confusion 
about the ALP attitude to State aid was revealed, Mr. Fraser said.
   Opposition Senators had voted against a Government amendment which 
indicated in clear terms that the Senate should support the principle of 
aid to independent schools.

   This amendment admittedly displaced a motion introduced by the 
Labor Party in the Senate.

   But once their own motion was lost one would have thought that 
members of the ALP in the Senate would have supported the motion expressing 
support for independent schools.
   "I would very much prefer that this matter be taken out of politics," 
Mr. Fraser said,"and I would like to see joint support for State aid to 
independent schools.

   "I welcomed Mr.Whitlam's original statement - but how much value can 
be placed on it when every Labor Senator present voted against the sort of 
motion I mentioned?"
   Mr. Fraser was speaking for the first time to a branch which had 
been in a subdivision transferred to the Wannon electorate in the last 
re-distribution.

   He was in the middle of his first tour in the subdivision since the 
re-distribution proposals were accepted by Parliament.

   In the afternoon he was available to meet electors in Willaura and 
Hamilton, and also presented a flag to the Rossbridge State School.

DEFENCE
   Mr. Fraser also spoke to the Willaura Liberal Party Branch about 
Government policies on defence.

   He said the significance of the decisions announced by the Prime 
Minister on February 25th were not always fully realised.

               5.


   In the past Australia had supported efforts made by the United 
Kingdom and the other countries of South East Asia to preserve peace in 
the region. Thus, we made considerable efforts to support Malaya against 
Communist insurrection of the 1950's, which lasted for up to 10 years. 
We also supported Malaysia during the difficult period of Confrontation.

   On both these occasions the major power had been the United
Kingdom, and we knew, as did the Malaysians, that the strength and resources 
of the United Kingdom Government were standing behind the efforts of all 
the countries which were involved.

   This was the background to all Australia's past efforts in these
areas.

   We had pulled our weight, and we had always known the forces of a 
major power were operating beside us and with us.

   Now Britain had made the decision to withdraw, said Mr. Fraser, and 
this was to be completed by 1971.

   The Prime Minister had announced the Government's decision to 
maintain forces from our three services in the Malaysia—Singapore area 
beyond 1971.

   We had done this because we recognised the peace and security of all 
the small countries of the area were important to us.

   Geographically, we lived on the edge of South—East Asia and we 
must involve ourselves in it.

   We must take part in co—operative efforts to preserve security so 
all the countries of the area could get down to the real business of 
government which was to improve the standards of life of all the people 
of the region.

   And so Australia would be involved, not only by her military presence 
but by her diplomatic actions and her economic aid, which was of very 
significant proportions compared to our size.

•

                 6.


       Of all the aid—giving countries, Australia stood third in relation 
   to the percentage of Gross National Income, and the proportion being spent 
   had been increasing in recent years, whereas that of many other countries 
   had been falling.

       The Government's decision represented a bold step into the future, 
   Mr. Fraser said.

       The decisions announced by the Prime Minister were historic ones.

       They committed Australia fully to participation in the region in 
   which we live, at a time when we would not have the comfortable thought 
   that the larger and more significant military forces of the United Kingdom 
   were present and available to meet the major part of a threat.

       The Prime Minister's statement was realistic. There was no 
   suggestion that Australia had taken on obligations and responsibilities 
   of a nation of 60 million people.

       In his statement, the Prime Minister had said, "It is clear, however, 
   that at some time in the future it could be possible that a situation 
   might arise when the scale of such subversion and infiltration from 
   outside — or some other organised threat to the region at present 
   unforeseen — could be such that Australian resources alone would be 
   insufficient to support successfully the forces of Malaysia and Singapore.

       "If such a situation should arise we would have to look to the 
   support of allies outside the region and the scale of Australia's continued 
   effort would in that case have to be decided in the light of all the 
   circumstances that then prevail."

       Mr. Fraser said he did not believe a responsible Australian 
   Government could have made any other decision than the one that had been 
   made, and that the proposals advocated by the Opposition to withdraw all 
   our forces except for possibly some training aids was quite unrealistic.

       It would in the light of British withdrawal have been interpreted 
   as a complete Australian withdrawal into isolationism.

~  f

                      7.


          The only thing that could give real confidence to the countries in 
      the region about our continuing concern would be the presence of forces 
      in the area.

          Otherwise they would construe our actions as wanting to get out of 
      the area, and trying to do it under the pious claims that we would return 
      if the circumstances required it,

          Such claims would not have given any confidence for the future.

          A condition, of course, to our continued involvement in the area 
      was that the two countries concerned, Malaysia and Singapore, wanted our 
      co—operation and the presence of our forces.

          They recognised the contribution we had made to stability in the 
      past and they wanted it to continue.

