<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wheat industry plans
Description: radio talk
Date: 11/05/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 01_72_"_±.„




WHEAT INDUSTRY PLANS

   Decisions reached recently affecting the wheat industry 
 in Australia demonstrate the value of co-operative action between 
 governments and primary producers in times of trouble.
   The wheat industry has been under severe pressure as a result 
 of a bumper 1968-69 harvest from record plantings of more than
 26 million acres. There were serious storage problems, and because 
 of world production surpluses the stage was set for an unprecedented
 struggle to find markets for the Australian crop.
   Some time ago the proposal that quotas should be established
 was put up to the Federal and State Governments, and discussion 
 of this proposal culminated in the recent announcement by the 
 Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Doug Anthony in Parliament.
   He announced that all parties had now accepted that quotas 
 should operate on delivery of wheat to the Wheat Board next season. 
 The proposal had the full support of the wheat industry in all 
 States, all State governments, the Commonwealth Government and the
 Reserve Bank.
    The magnitude of the problem can be seen in a comparison
 of production figures - estimated deliveries of over 500 million 
 bushels from the 1968/69 crop compared with the previous year's 
 production of less than 280 million bushels. (The increase in 
 Victorian production was an estimated 200 per cent over the drought- 
 affected 1967-68 season crop, which had been the lowest for many
 years.)
    These conditions coincided with a rise in world wheat production,
 raising the problem of finding markets offering sufficiently 
 remunerative returns for our wheat producers. One of the bright 
 aspects was the sale at the beginning of this year of more than two 
 million tons of wheat to Mainland China, which had become our biggest 
 customer for wheat. This sale resulted from expert bargaining by the

          -2—


Wheat Board authorities, and while welcome it by no means
provided a complete solution to the difficult marketing problems
facing the industry in disposing of the massive Australian crop.
  The China transaction, as a matter of fact, amounted to no
more than 18 per cent of the expected deliveries to the Board for
the 1968/69 crop. With the possibility of large carryover at the
end of the season, grave storage problems threatened.
  SP it was up to the industry to take a long, hard look at its
problems — and this is in fact what happened. Finally the Australian
Wheatgrowers Federation, heeding the warnings of the Government
that another bumper harvest would create virtually intolerable
problems, suggested that quotas should operate for the 1969/70
harvest.
  All sectors of the industry reacted promptly and responsibly
in meeting the challenge. The State governments accepted the
proposals and notified the Commonwealth that they undertook to
ensure that the quota plan operated successfully.
  At the end of last month, the Commonwealth announced its
support for the plan, which provided that quotas for the States would
total 344 million bushels, with provision for a further 13 million
bushels of prime hard wheat if it became available. The Commonwealth
agreed to pay a first advance payment of $1.10 a bushel (the 13th
consecutive season in which the first advance would be at this
level) on all wheat delivered to the Board within the quotas on the
1969-70 season.
  The Government laid down that no more than $440 million would
be made available through the Reserve Bank as a total first payment
and to cover storage, handling and administration costs. The
Government has made it clear that these sums were not to be exceeded.
If the quantity of wheat delivered to the Wheat Board rose above the
set limit of 357 million bushels, then the level of the first advance
payment would be dropped accordingly below $1.10 a bushel.
  The co—operation that led to the quota proposals and the ultimate
acceptance of them by all parties represented a commendable
attitude by the industry in negotiation with the governments involved.
A sound wheat industry is of the highest importance to the Australian

          -3—
    •
economy. In the field of rural exports wheat is the second largest 
foreign exchange earner, returning more than $343 million to this 
country from wheat grain sales abroad in 1967/68.
  Problems still remain, but with the application of self- 
discipline in the industry and a continuation of co-operation with 
governments, these I feel sure will be overcome. The Federal 
Government has sought to help by co-ordinating action by the States 
if this is their wish, although the decision to implement the 
State quotas and how they are to be allocated are matters for the 
States.
  One problem raised was that some growers had already completed 
their 1969/70 plantings, but as my colleague Mr Anthony has pointed 
out it was well known that the Australian Wheatgrowers Federation 
decided On March 12 to recommend the introduction of quotas.
   It will be necessary to review quotas following completion 
of the 1969/70 harvest and there will need to be a close
examination of remaining stocks, the industry's financial position 
and marketing prospects by the industry itself and each of the 
governments involved.
  The Great Barrier Reef, which runs from Torres Strait south 
for 1200 miles along the Queensland coastline, is one of the natural 
wonders of the world - the largest single structure ever built by 
an animal. It was concern for the preservation of the Reef as one 
of our priceless natural heritages that brought together a group of 
people at a symposium in Sydney on 3 May. The symposium was 
called by the Australian Conservation Foundation, a body dedicated 
to the preservation of our flora and fauna, the establishment of 
special reserves for native animals and plants, and in general, 
the education of the public to an appreciation of the needs of 
conservation.
  The Symposium was most successful. The widest possible exchange 
of ideas was made possible by the conference - the Reef's legal 
status, the resources that it offers to man, and the nature and 
variety of the conservation problems involved. The Symposium, 
reflected the earnestness with which many people view the need 
to preserve the native plants, animals and environment in a
situation in which the relentless and necessary path of development

         -4—



can destroy forever these natural possessions. Sharply 
divergent views emerged about whether drilling for oil or other
industrial exploitation of the Reef would cause irreparable damage
to the Reef.
  There was recognition of the Reef as a major tourist
attraction and its current and potential value to the country in
this role. An expert informed the conference that Reef tourism
was growing at the rate of about 10 per cent a year, but there
was a threat to the Reef even from tourist activities, and suggestions
were put forward describing how damage could be avoided or minimised.
  But there was I believe an overall general understanding that
the Reef was one of our great natural attractions and that nothing
should be done that would have the effect of destroying it. The
problem was how to ensure that the essential features of the Reef
are adequately preserved. For my part, in officially opening the
Symposium, I pointed out that the Commonwealth regarded the reef
as a priceless asset. We believe we have an obligation to
preserve it so that it may survive for all time as one of the
great wonders of the world. In so far as the Commonwealth has
the power, it will use this power to prevent the Reef being
despoiled.

