<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor's barrel of promises
Description: radio talk
Date: c 1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    6.4;14: (L'7ù ),TA14 of Peom/sis



  1!!.   Bendigo by-election campaign has intensified imessomadi over the past 
     week, and the various lismilidismm political parties have put their policies 

     before the voters. I do not intend tonight to comment on the possible 

     out. of the by-election, except perhaps to state that a by-election
       iiit, male.,•..—i''_            has traditionally supplied voters in Australialiam 

    wiiimboomme an opportunity to give the Government of the day an admonition, 

     a rap on the knuckles if you like, on an occasion on which--because it 
     affects only one seat--the Government cannot be voted out or an Opposition 

      voted in. When a Government has a record majority--such as held at 

      present by the Government in Canberra--it may +i again ammerrerkamm prove
                                      a temptation to admonish the Government, although 

      it is always the hope that one's candidate will prevail because of his 
      association with the Government,w which has guided the development of this 

      country for so long and with such success.


fjIt is, however, important in a by-election or in any election loss that when 
     a candidate makes promises about points of policy, that he should be able 

     to back up that promise gaialiaamAallaasA by reference to specific policies

r or at least justify it by allusion to his party's record. I realise it is 

     difficult for the Labor Party It to take the second step, because that 

     Party has not sat on the Government midemelosiiamolskim,benches in Canberra 

     for about 20 years. One must therefore resort. to their past performance

     when they were in Government*--before 1949. This week in an advertisement 
     in a Bendigo electorate newspaper the Labor candidate Mr. Kennedy promised 

     primary produders a return t4'orderly marketing" system as established 
     by Labor. That promise brought great amusement to farmers whose memories 

     are long, because they recalled the sort of'orderly marketing perpetrated
     by a Labor Government a                   in 19+6 when that Government concluded a deal

     to sell 18 million               ~-~of !'~ustralian wheat to New Zealand. Matters, however, 

     were far from amusing in those days.. Let me briefly recapitulate the position 

      at that time. The Labor Government's agreement provided for the sale of 

      18 million bushels of wheat to New Zealand, most of it at 5/9d a bushel. 
     bra ìe ruling price for wheat sold on overseas makke s at the time was

      considerably higher than this, and went to 17/ a bush 1--ate later, even              I
      beyond--during the currency of this agreement.                                           Persistent
      questioning spearheaded by Mr. John McEwen, who was them in Opposition 

      at the time, led to disclosure of this notorious up dealiliwhich was
      concluded by an Australian Labor Government at a time, it might be noted,
                                                                                   xi when New ealn nd

      wheatgrowers were negotiating for a guarantbed price abóve that which
      their Government had set---and that price was 7/id. a bushel. And so the

      Australian and New Zealand Labor governments were able to keep down the 

       price of wheat to their growers instead of allowing them access to the 

      higher world prices then ruling.

  EThis shocking example of "orderly marketing" set off tit grower and political 
     protests that rightly raged for some years, milimilmeloag forcing the
     Labor Government of the time to dip heavily into public funds to the tunesoak
     of some l* £7 million to I.BilE make some atonement to P.ustralian whs atgrowers.
                                 Mr. McEwen in 1)47 asismomirmémoiiimompiimado reflected the 

     anger and bitterness of a wide section of Australians when he condemned 
     the Labor Government's actions asAbarefaced lying, suppression of facts, 
     evasion and equivocation and brazen and shameless deception. I have already 
     mentioned how Labor's "orderly marketing" was recalled by the promise 
     made during the week by the Labor candidate in the Bendigo by-election. 
     Mr. McEwen, now of course Minister for Trade and Industry, was reminded 
     in Parliament during the week of the deal. Mention of it served to re-kindl4
     the fury with which he denounced the scheme in the 1940's. Ilk He said it 

       was a quite incredible transaction, not to be regarded as anything less
     than an act of              generosity by a Labe_ Go~zesn~me~,t to be pailat the                           for

     expense of the Australian wheatgrowers. And this, al he said, was called
     orderly marketing. If Labor's polio                                    .p eva ed.,
                                                                   woUl                                                   ' orderly
       arketing."<°rs                                                                             Mr. McEwen.                  we t on
r to record how it was iiim the Opposition of which he was a member forced 
     the Labor Government to beat a retreat on the deal. The protest campaign 

     led. to Labor making good from the ,iustralian treasury to the wheatgrowers 
     the millions of pounds mitnik f which they would otherwise have been 

     deprived.
       uote0I hope I Labor will never sopmet be in a position to control
     'orderly marketing' along these lines ever again, said Mr. McEwen.

  rt might be toimmippiewommissok a beneficial exercise to contrast this 
     Labor handling of ummimilimg primary produce marketing with the Government's
     own enlightened policiesoviiiiiiimemdediAs                               Considerable                             market prob- 
     lems have beset the wheat industry lira because of rising world production 
     and resultant fierce seepea0 competition for available remunerative
     markets.                                                        .. _ '.                .,               .._      _ The Govern- 

     ment and the industry have faced these problems side by side. Adminis- 
     tration of the wheat stabilisation scheme over the years+liwm by the 
     Liberal-CP Government has been based on continuing sound policies. The 

     Federali State governments and the industry are no co-operating to ensure 
     the success of the system of delivery quotas propo ed by the Wheatgrow rs 
     Federation.

  2.
  Their eyes on the next Federal elections, the Labor Party has been in a 
   enerous mood for some time now. The promises outlined by Mr. Whitlam 
  and other Party spokesmen would fill a "lucky dip" barrel, and no doubt 
  a wide section of the public have been wondering iiiiiii where all th oney
  is coming from. The cost of ,~ffmi,raA xsm~. two ALP policy proposa s 
  was disclosed in Parliament this week following a question to the Minister 
  for Social Services, Mr. Wentworth. The question dealtftirir with the cost 
  to the Australian taxpayer of proposals to Iliminate the means test and to 
  increase the pension rate to half the minimum basic wage. These are both 
  . Labor _promises. Labor's pension promise$, a resolution adopted by
  the 4LP's 1967 conference, is that pensions for married pensioner couples be 
  at least equal to the minimum wage, and that increases in that wage should 
  be applied to pensions. Recently Mr. Whitlam said the L bor Party if 
  elected this year would phase out the means test over six year and pay a 
  full pension to everyone 65 years and over. This, ire the newspapers 
  reported him as saying, would cost well below X100 million a year. In 
  Parliament during last week, Mr. entworth produced a set of official 
  figures which made the calculations of the Oposition Leader sound sometning 
  like a pipe dream. Mr. Wentworth said although there was no such thing 
  at eresent as an accepted minimum wage, he errodidlearbois had made his cal- 
  culations on the basis of that being about /38 to $40 a .week. If the 
  present pension were raised to a 50 per cent of that figure, the direct 
  cost to the Budget would be about 7200million a year i— If the
  means test were abolished, and the higher rate of pension         operated, 
  the cost to the ere :ublic purse would be an additional sum of just under 
  "7500 million a year. And so, irrespective of the fringe benefits now 
  received by pensioners, the total cost of these two steps would be around 
  $700 million. If you wanted to add the cost of the fringe benefits, 
  a rough guess would be that these would cost in the vicinity fo a further 
  $150 million.
Curing the week I I Oraiiimmdmolimmimiedwilmsikeirimmemimpresented to Parliament 
  details of the progress made with the Commonwealth's $80 million aprogram 
  for the construction and equipping of science laboratories in both 
  Government and independent sedonndaty schools. This program has vastly 
  improved the quality of science teaching in these schools and has di^ 
      mOsirmin fully justified its role as one of the Commonwealth's sbhemes 
  to improve the quality of education in Australia. Irexplained that under 
  the Act a total of $37.7 million is available over the three-year period. 
  from July 1968 to June 1971. Of this just over $16 is for independent 
  schools. The mama balance of over $21 million is for government schools. 
  By June 1971 substa~ntia inroads will have been made into the backlog of 
  needs fof science facilities in both Government and independent schools--
  but, of course, we realise that more will          -"— need to be done.

   4.


   So towards the end of the ;.resent three-years period the
41:Government will introduce legislation to continue operation of the scheme
          ir beyond 1)71. i;t this stage we intend to alter the basis of allocation
                   of grants among tamosairsia                                  all recipients 
   of these funds so that they will be made available ar-"-°-----n according 
   to outstanding needs.1.7 my own electorate of Wù_nnon, the benefits resulting 
   from the application of these science laboratories funds will be well known. 
   A good number of 0 government and independent schools have received
   either full laboratories or equipment under the program, and I am sure the 
   parents of the students at these schools fully appreciate the advantages 
   that these facilities confer.

