<!--start metadata-->
Title: India and Pakistan war, rural employment, metric conversion
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 12/12/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     BROADCAST TALK 3LK, Monday, December 13.

                    3HA Sunday, December 12. 
                    3YB Thursday, December 16.

     Hello Ladies and Gentlemen,

     It is to be hoped that the call for a cease—fire by the 
     United Nations General Assembly in the war between 
     India and Pakistan will be quickly put-into effect.

     However with the Soviet Veto in the Security Council and 
     the announced intention of the Indian Government to
     disregard the United Nations request, it is likely that 
     hostilities will ... unfortunately ... continue further.

     As the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Bowen, pointed 
•    out this week the Australian Government has made repeated 
     efforts to influence the leaders of India and Pakistan to 
     avoid armed conflict.

     The Prime Minister has sent a number of messages to both 
     Mrs Indira Gandhi and President Yahya Kahn uring a 
     politcal settlement of the East Pakistan question.

     The Australian Government will continue to take a position 
     of neutrality in this conflict, offering assistance to 
     both India and Pakistan. This does not include the supply 
     of arms or war materials.

     Although the Indian Government has now officially recognised 
     the Bangla Desh as the rulers of East Pakistan, Australia 
     recognises the Government of Pakistan as the legal
     government of both east and west sections.

                  Broadcast ...



    While we are aware that the United Nations general 
    assembly resolution calling for a cease-fire may not 
    be enforced Australia will continue to do all it can to 
    urge the two countries to comply with the UN request.

    In the meantime steps are being taken to protect or 
    evacuate Australian nationals from danger zones in Pakistan 
    and Northern India.



    I would like to deal now with the new measures announced 
    by the Government to assist employment in country centres.

    As you know an estimated 36 million dollars will be made 
~   available to country centres throughout Australia over 
    the next 18 months for employment-creating projects.

    This will be welcomed by those cities and towns in Western 
    Victoria which are xperiencing unemployment problems
    through the decline in some'sectors of the rural industry 
    particularly wool.

    A number of measures have been introduced to help meet 
    these problems. The wool industry itself is at present 
    examining proposals to put before the government, and 
    a wool study group has been established under Sir Richard 
    Randall, a former Secretary to the Treasury and an 
    experienced wool classero

    At the same time it is necessary to take steps to 
    alleviate unemployment without impeding the long-term
    adjustments necessary to meet changing economic conditions.

    Full details of this scheme are now being determined in 
    consultation with the State Premiers. In broad terms 
    it will be similar to that provided under the drought-relief 
    programs in recent years and will be brought into effect 
    as soon as possible

                                            Broadcast ... 3


             The subject of metric conversion is one which is T
          coming into prominence with many conversion programs due 
                              nnext year.


          Last week I s. Hittmdx tabled in the House of Representatives 
          the first annual report of the Metric Conversion Board
          which is included in the Ministery of Education and Science.


          This states that the main change—over to metric measurements 
          in Australia will occur in the years 1973 to 75. By the 
          end of 1976 an estimated three quarters of all our general 
          activities will be converted to the metric system.


          In recent years there has been a very marked move towards 
          the universal use of the metric system, to such an extent 
          in fact that nearly all countries of the world will soon 
•         be using these measurements.


          Together with Australia countries such as Britain, Canada, 
          New Zealand and South Africa are presently getting ready 
          to go metric..


          Following an official inquiry in the United States of 
          America the Secretary for Commerce has now recommended 
          to Congress that the metric system be introduced.


          This first report of the metric conversion board describes 
          the establishind-of a structure within which planning 
          for conversion can take place. To this end more than
          100 committees covering all sections of industry, commerce, 
          and the community are being formed.


           It is # most apparent that these committees are tackling 
          their task of preparing for metric conversion with a
          great deal of enthusiasm, and it is            that the 
          change—over will go as smoothly as the switch to decimal 
           currency six years ago, although the change—over period 
          will be considerably longer and it may take us all a little 
          longer to get used to litres instead of pints.


           GOODBYE FOR NOW

