<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian economy
Description: press statement
Date: 2/04/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                              April 2nd, 1961


PRESS STATEMENT:
MALCOM FRASER:
                                    AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY

The following is the first of three press statments on the Australian economy.


                As soon as Parliament re-assembled, the Leader of the Opposition moved 
a censure notion on the Government concerning the Government's financial policies.
It was inevitable that Mr. Calwell would do this, Any Opposition Leader would, at
a time such as the present, launch a censure motion against the Government. The 
Opposition would do this if for no other reason than that the Government at the time
was unpopular and the Opposition would try to make the Government more unpopular by 
giving unfavourable policy items publicity through the debate.
                However, the success or not of the censure motion depends upon the 
defence the Government can make of its policies and upon the alternatives that the 
Opposition has to offer. Mr. Calwell, as I understand his speech, has only one 
alternative, and that is to re-impose import licensing. He seemed to argue - and 
other Members of the Opposition argued similarly - that this would solve all Australia's 
problems. Of course, the solution is not as simple as this.
                The lay person never finds it particularly easy to grasp the whys and 
wherefores of econcmic measures, but he certainly feels the effects of them, and if
the effect is bad the Government is, of course, unpopular. In this regard, I only
want to say that any Government that tries to curb a boom must be unpopular if it is 
doing the job properly.
               In a boom time, a nation is spending beyond its income, as Australia 
was, internally and externally. Nobody likes having their income reduced. This is,
in effect, what the Government has done by introducing measures designed to balance 
the economy both internally and externally.
                Conversely, if there is some recession in the economy and the slack 
needs taking up, the Government finds it easy to introduce policies that are popular. 
If there are resources unemployed, they can be stimulated, reductions in tax of one
kind or another.    Under those circumstances, the Government would naturally be popular. 
                So much for generalities.
                The present economic situation is complex, but it can be understood 
and should be. It is my job, as a supporter of what the Government has done, to 
explain it and then you, yourselves, can judge whether the Government is right or not.

The story begins about 14 months ago. At that time, the
Government was becoming increasingly concerned about inflation. The wage
decisions of the previous twelve months had added £150M a year to the purchasing
power of the wage earner. This increased purchasing power was not, at the time, 
matched by increased productivity. It was bound to give stimulus to inflation.
At the same time, the Goverment was greatly disturbed by the positioon of exporting
industries, particularly rura1 industries. Many rural industries were, at that 
time, and are now in difficulties caused mainly by falling prices overseas over 
which this Government, or any Australian Government, has no control. Further, 
inflation caused largely by the pressures of development inside Australia had been 
a contributing factor.
                       Even though some would discount this because inflation in other
countries since 1953 has marched pretty well hand in hand with inflation in Australia.
However, it was clear that more inflation in this country would make the exporting 
    industries' position worse.
                       Last February 12 months, the Government announced four m cures
          to help curb inflation at that time. The first of these was wage policy 
under which the Government argued in the Arbitration Court that there should not then 
be a further increase in the basic wage, having regard to recent decisions that had
added £150M to the wages bill. The Government argued — and I believe rightly -  
that higher wages at that time would do nothing to raise the standard of life of 
the wage earner. It would increase his money wages but not his real wages in 
terms of goods because the increase would not have been matched by an increasing 
productivity and prices would have been forced up.
                       The Government further announced that the Reserve Bank had 
instructed the Trading Banks to increase their advances to the public only moderately. 
It wanted a policy of credit restraint at that time.
                       The Government also announced that when it introduced its 
Budget in August it would budget for a surplus which represents an attack on inflation 
as opposed to a deficit Budget. Briefly, under a surplus Budget, a Government 
collects more revenues than it spends, which is the proper thing to do in a time of 
inflation. Under a deficit Budget, the Government spends more than it taxes in 
any one year, which is the correct thing to do when the econopy needs some stimulus. 
Deficits should be financed out of the surpluses that have been created in times 
of inflation. You will remember that the Government carried out this promise

                                          3

      when the Budget was actually introduced.
                    The fourth item of policy announced February twelve months ago
          was the lifting of import licensing. The Government argued that Australian 
      industries had, for too long, been protected not only by the traditional tariff
      but also by licensing. Because of this double protection, may industries 
      have been able to put up prices where they need not have done so, and would not 
      have done so if there had been some external competition. This was an important
      element in the fight against inflation. The Government felt it was in a
      sound position in lifting licensing. Fourteen months ago, our overseas
      reserves were particularly strong. They had been built up for the very day when 
      licensing could be abolished.
                         These measures would have been effective in restraining 
         inflation and bringing internal and external balance into the economy if it were 
      not for two matters that appeared after the Budget we introduced in August. 
                          A later report will deal with the Government's November
      measure.



~

