<!--start metadata-->
Title: Prime Minister's visit to Portland
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 6/07/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                     rosT      •-••        /*--
  I             By Malcolm Presort Member for Wannon.
            In the past Portland has lia u notable history and evenow 
I believe the growing town is proud of its early asaociatious with
Victoria's first pioneers.    For Low A years it loAced as though kortland 
might remain relatively undeveloped but in the early years after the war 
and in the beginning or this decade especially men 4' vision begah to
shape Portland's destiny.   This vision was a deep-sea harbour, safe from 
any storm, capable of berthing the largeat snips and only one hour 
sailing from the main shipping route. , This harbour was to have the 
most up-to-date facilitiem for exporting the primary produce from the 
hinterland and it was hoped that significant development would alto take 
place in the growth of secondary industries.
            Thia vision, that for many yuars was little more than a
dream about which man would tulk, has now very nearly come to full reality. 
It is true that industries have not yet establimed themaelves in kottland 
but the harbour its to all intents and purposes an accomplished fact.
Nothing can now stop its completion.    The main breakwater has reached 
its full length and contractors ere building the wharves. 1;ew railways 
bridges and canals have been built in the programme to connect the lort 
to the State railway system.
            In the last few years Australia has gone through an
unequalled period of growth and expansion, greater even than that of the 
U.S.A. in her most rapid period of development. In certain areas th 
face of Australia has been changed, great new factories have been con- 
structed, electric power and irrigation water supplies have ben vastly 
increased, the :Aloemy Mountains scheme is already returning benefits to
 ustralie in the output of hrdro-eleotricity and water for irrigation.
In the north new mining enterprises have brought new towns into being and 
        greatly to the wealth and population of Aastralias Oil refineries 
and steel works have been built or expanded
             The key words La Australia today are expension and develop- 
moat and the Australian people have caught the spirit of this greet 
adventurelupon the puocess of which our future survival as an independent
nation depends.
             The people of western Victoria have not been apart from this

                           ... 2


gr t movement forward. We have been a part of it and have made our 
  11 
contribution to it. The output from farms and properties has been 

greatly increased an mare peo,le have been settled on the land through

soldier ana clone settlement.  nevertheless in terms of the future, 

it there were one thing to which people could point end say "What is the 

most significant development being undertaken in Victolia", they would 

say without hesitation, the development of iortland Harbor. iortland 

is something that might not have happened had it not been for the energy 

and initiative of certain people in aortland, that it has happened is 

to their credit and to the everlasting benefit of aastern Victoria and 

South Eastern South Australia.

           In view of the greattilvelopsor/ taing place, I am mo a

pleased that iortland is t. be visited by our 1.rime Anister on July 18th 

accompanied by Dame i'attio. It is the first time a arime Minister has 

visited the Mort and the national publicity that should follow the visit 

should do much to make ull tuetralia realise the significance of I'ortland

Harbor.

           The :rthe Minister and Dame Pattie will fly to Warrnambool 

Airport where they will be met by Karrnambool Cit, and Shire authorities. 

They will then drive to lortlund. The Prima Minister will visit 

Borthwicks before lunch whileDume iattie lirnsiniliaZSJUDZIMILlin will 

attend a women's function. The Mayor, Cr. Mabel Hedditch,will be hostess 

to the k'rime Minister and Dame i-attie olvr lunch and in the afternoon 

the inspection of the Harbor will take place.

           In the last two months the Irian MinisLer has been visiting 

those areas of ustralia that have been experienciag the greatest develop- 

ment such as the mining areas of aueenaland or that have the greatest 

potential for futuro development, such as the Kimberley*. I an particular 

pleased that kortlan. runes in his mind of real significance and that it 

is included in the kind of tour of Australia that he has undertaken.

           Lo-one tries to pretend that Governments are responsible for 

all the development ana expunsion that takes place but quite clearly they 

can create conaitions that will be favourable to development, that will 

encourage people to use their initiative. It is to our .arime Ministe 's 

very real credit that despite wide fluctuation in our overseas earnings 

he has been able to maintain vigour ad active development throughout

Australia.

