<!--start metadata-->
Title: The Government versus the people
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 22/09/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

                             CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 
     HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVESTEL. 721211










FOR INFORMATION    EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m., Sunday . 


                         22nd September, 1974. 





  ELECTORAL STATEMENT BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P., 

  MEMBER FOR WANNON - 22nd September, 1974 






         THE GOVERNMENT VERSUS THE PEOPLE




In this report I want to talk about the broad thrust of the 

Labour budget. Detailed proposals will be dealt with in la".er 

reports. It is the broad thrust which will prove so damaging 

and dangerous for Australia.




The Treasurer is on record as having said that he wants to lift 

Public sector spending to 40% of everything that is produced in 

Australia. It has been running somewhere around 30%.




In pursuit of this policy the Government has increased its ex- 

penditure by a massive 33%. It is the largest increase in any 

peace time budget ever, taking expenditure to over $16,000 million.




At the same time the Government has tried to suggest that the 

average Australian can increase his own expenditure on the things 

he needs for his family and his own home. It can't be done.




The Government has created conflict. The Government is expanding 

its expenditure without any restraint. It wants a larger pro- 

portion of all the real resources to be spent by Government and 

determined by Government. This would be honest if they, at the 

same time, said to individuals - "you will have to curb your own 

expenditure because we the Government believe we know better than 

you how to spend your money." But they have not said this to in- 

dividuals and thus there is a competition for resources between 

private people, on the one hand, and the Government, on the other.




This competition is the basic cause of the massive and damaging 

inflation now ravaging Australia. I believe that inflation will 

hit 25%. The Government itself admits implicitly to over 20% 

in the budget documents. The Government has declared war on 

private expenditures, the great bulk of which, come from the 

everyday payments of individuals and families around Australia.

                            2.
Until the Government resolves this conflict, either by lessening 
its own outrageous demands on resources or by telling individuals 
quite plainly that it is not going to allow them to spend as much 
in real terms in the future, inflation will continue.

There is a major difference in these matters between the Labour 
Government and the Opposition parties - we believe that people 
should have the right to maximise their individual choice and 
that we should try and do everything possible to establish the 
circumstances where individuals can solve their own problems, 
through their own decisions.

The present Government believes that private decision making is 
wrong and that the Government should tell us how to live. There 
are other consequences of this massive Government expen iture.

Confidence in the Australian economy is now almost totally des- 
troyed. Nobody believes that the Government's programme will 
resolve the major domestic problems that face us all. As a 
result, people will not invest in the future. They will not 
replace old equipment and they will not pursue expansion prog- 
rams for their industries.

Thus employment opportunities will fail right around Australia. 
I believe forthcoming unemployment figures will indicate greater 
increases than we have seen even over the last two months.

The Minister for Labour has in the figures he has been using ex- 
cluded school leavers. This seems unreasonable. If a school 
leaver is registered for work and is unemployed he is a person 
just as much as anyone else. He is possibly in more difficulty 
than older members of the community, because he is seeking his 
first job. Why the Minister for Labour does not count such 
people n his monthly press statements, I just cannot understand.

The Minister mentioned a seasonally adjusted figure in September 
of about 110,000 out of work. If school leavers are included 
the seasonally adjusted figure is very close to 135,000, the 
largest seasonally adjusted figure since 1946.

Unemployment will involve immense personal hardship and the gov- 
ernment will need to develop much more effective and co-ordinated 
manpower policies to deal with it than it has so far envisaged.

The third major consequence of the present budget concerns Aus- 
tralia's international solvency. The balance of payments has 
gone sour as a result of the government's policies. The signif- 
icant reserves of 5,000 million dollars that were built in our 
time, are likely to be entirely dissipated by June of next year.


                         0'1/3

                          3.

Thus the Government has three achievements to its credit; it 
has a budget which will guarantee the continuation of inflation; 
it has a budget that will reduce job opportunities and add en- 
ormously to unemployment and which at the same time will bring 
Australia to the edge of international bankruptcy.

         FRASER CONGRATULATES HAWKE

There is one other thing that I would like to mention. Mr dawke, 
President of the A.C.T.U. and the Labour party has said the bud- 
get provides a basis for restraint and co-operation of the union 
members. I congratulate him on his statement and hope that he is 
right.

But I suggest that he might have one or two difficulties. The 
budget is based on 33% increase in Government expenditure, on a 
46% increase in income tax collections and 222% increase in wages 
and on an impossible minimum 20% increase in inflation.

At first blush there does not seem to be a great deal of restraint 
in these figures, and Mr Hawke will perform a miracle if he can 
really get the Trade Unions to exhibit restraint in the face of 
this quite frantic situation.

There is, perhaps, another solution. Since the budget is pred- 
icted on a 222% increase in wages, maybe he thinks the promise of 
a further 22% on top of the recent round of wage increases will 
be an adequate exhibition of restraint. If so I doubt if the 
Australian community will agree with him.

The budget is a tragic document. There might be political mile- 
age in it for the Liberal and Country Parties but I would much 
prefer that the Government introduce a responsible, decent budget 
that would have protected the interests of thousands of individ- 
ual people throughout Australia. If that resulted in greater 
political credit to a Labour Government and some .political cost 
to the coalition parties, I am certain that the Opposition would 
welcome it gladly and with open arms. There is no joy in the 
Opposition gaining in political terms at the cost of unemployment, 
hardship and personal suffering which this budget will involve 
for thousands of Australians.

           ..000..

