<!--start metadata-->
Title: Censure motion, radio base and defence
Description: press statement
Date: 28/04/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     PRESS STATEMENT                                                               /d

     MALCOLM FRASER:                                          April 28th,1963

                                  CENSURE MOTION (Continued)

                                RADIO BASE AND DEFENCE

                   Last week I spoke about the censure motion and how a large part 
     of this debate ranged around issues involved in the establishment of the 
     United States Naval Communications Centre in Western Australia, I said the 
     Opposition was on the defensive on this issue. Today I want to show why 
     this is so.

                  Australian Labour Party policy in peace and war has differed 
     greatly over matters of defence. During the last war, the Curtin Government 
     behaved as I hope any patriotic hardworking Australian Government would under 
     similar circumstances. t pursued the war as vigorously as it could. Control 
     of the Australian Armed Forces was placed entirely in the hands of an American. 
     Unified command was essential to the proper conduct of the war. This was 
     recognised and, as a minor power, our troops had to be placed in the charge of 
     our major ally. There is only praise for this action.

                  During the war, the United States built up a magnificent defensive 
     base at Manus Island at a cost of £100M. The United States for a long time 
     wanted a full and proper agreement with Australia on the peaceful and permanent
•    use of this base, The then External Affairs Minister, Dr, Evatt, procrastinated 
     so long over the negotiations that the Americans came to the conclusion that 
     the Australian Government in peace time would never make proper arrangements 
     for the Manus Island base. Therefore the Americans broke off negotiations 
     and established a base on another island, Guam, As a result, Australia. 
     lost a tremendous asset - a base on Manus Island which would have been fully 
     available to the Australian Forces and a major part of the American defensive 
     system in this part of the world. Shades of the Manus Island policy are now 
     evident over this Naval Communications Centre to be built at Learmonth in 
     Western Australia.

                  Within the last two or three years several members of the 
     Opposition have said in Parliament that too much money is spent on defence; one 
     said that we would do better to devote our defence vote to building a railway 
     across Australia or conducting some other public work. I do not want to-go 
     into names and details but the record stands plainly for anyone who wants to 
     read it. If anyone is interested, I have the references which clearly indicate 
     that 8 members of the Opposition have, in recent years, said they want our 
     defence vote reduced or who have implied that it is wasted. Two of these -
•    8 said that there should be no Naval Communications Centre in Western Australia. 
     Indeed, last October, the Australian Labour Party Federal Executive passed a 
     resolution which Mr. Haylen, front bench member of the Labour Party, said 
     clearly meant the Australian Labour Party oppesed4-the radio base. This is 
     also recorded in Hansard of late last year.

                  The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Calwell, recognised that vc 3;l.t- 
     right opposition to the base would place the Australian Labour Party in an 
     intolerable electoral position and to give him credit, I do not doubt that he 
     also recognised that it would place Australia in an intolerable position with 
     our relations with the United States. Mr. Calwell asked that a special 
     conference of the Australian Labour Party be held to discuss foreign policy, 
     in particular the radio base issue. The Federal Conference of the Australian 
     labour Party is the supreme policy-making and governing body of the Party. It 
     normally meets only once every two years. It has full power over the State 
     Branches of the Party. It has the right to suspend State Executives of the 
     Party. It has the right and the power and ability to make every Australian 
     Labour Party member of the Federal Parliament do as it wishes. The appropriate 
     rule of the Conference is Rule 10 and in plain terms it says that the decisions 
     of the Conference shall be binding on all Parliamentary members of the Australian 
     Labour Party.

                  The Conference is composed of six members from each State. The 
    different States have their own rules about the election of these six delegates. 
     It is unusual for politicians to be members of the Conference although Mr. Clyde 
    Cameron and Mr. Barnard from South Australia & Tasmania respectively both are./2.

                                       -  2 -


             The most powerful man in the Conference is said to be Mr. Chamberlain, 
      who is Secretary of the Party in Western Australia and Secretary of the
       Conference.   It's interesting to note that it was Mr. Chamberlain who
       announced the results of the special Conference, not Mr. Calwell,  Before 
       the special Conference was held it was Mr. Chamberlain who is reported to rove 
       told Federal Labour Members of Parliament not to talk about foreign policy and
       defence issues, not Mr. Calwell.  They were told not to talk about these
       issues because many different viewpoints have been expressed by different A.L.P. 
      members.


             When the Conference does not meet, the Federal Executive, which has. two
      members from each State, is the supreme governing body, It is rare again for 
       politicians to be on this Federal Executive and its decisions are binding on 
       all Labour politicians. Thus, there are two outside bodies - the Conference of 
      36 and the Executive of 12, both of whom can tell every Labour politician from 
       Mr. Calwell down what to do, When there has been a very strong Labour Party 
       Leader this has not always mattered, For example, for a long time there had 
      been traditional Labour Party policy that only volunteers to the Armed Services 
       could be made to serve beyond Australia. Conscripts could only serve in 
      Australia. Mr. Curtin knew that this would make it impossible for Australia to 
      prosecute her war effort effectively, He had an argument with the Labour Party 
      Conference of that day about this issue. Mr. Curtin is reported to have laid 
      his Leadership on the line in the following terms - "If you don't authorise me
0     to do what I know to be in the interests of Australia, I will resign". This 
      is the way a strong Leader should behave end any Leader of any country needs to 
      be strong. Mr. Calwell knows that the Naval Communications Centre in Western 
      Australia is as necessary to Australia's future defence as was Mr. Curtin's 
      decision about conscription during the war. He spoke to members of the Conference:. 
      He asked them to support the base, Fifteen of the 36 voted flat against 
      having the base under any conditions, Seventeen of them voted against having it 
      even with the fairly stringent conditions that the New South Wales motion had 
      attached to it. Thus, certainly 15 and possibly 17 members of the Conference 
      that met last month do not want to co-operate with our Ally - the United States, 
      on this matter.


             The Conference decision manly supported the base by 19 votes to 17 because 
      Mr. Duggan from Queensland refused to vote with his five other Queensland members. 
      He supported the resolution for the base. If he had not, official Conference 
      and A.L.P. policy would have been against the base. An 18-all decision, under 
      Conference rules, is equivalent to a negative vote.


             The margin of victory for the base therefore is very small indeed.
•     There are reports that when the biennial Federal Conference is held at Perth in 
      June the decision will be changed. There are some who say that Mr, Chamberlain 
      is against the Radio Base and these people go on to say that Mr. Chamberlain 
      always gets his way in the A.L.P. by one means or another. Certainly his own 
      Branch delegates from the West all voted solidly against the base.


             Mr. Calwell should have laid his Leadership on the line on this issue as 
      Mm. Curtin did over conscription. If he had he would have won the almost unan- 
      imous support of the Conference and of his Parliamentary colleagues. He would 
      have deserved the admiration of the Australian people. However, he did not do 
      this. He waited around the corridors of the Kingston Hotel until the Conference 
      made its decision late at night, He is apparently not prepared to challenge 
      a rule that could make an Australian Labour Prime Minister subservient to an 
      outside unconstitutional body owing no responsibility to the Australian Parliament 
      or people.


             The present minority view of the Conference is heavily supported inside 
      the Labour Party by Parliamentary members, It is just as heavily opposed by 
      other members. It is easy to see that this is a deep and fundamental issue 
      which Australians have got to learn to face and the Australian Labour Party has 
      got to learn to face. It is tragic that the Party that is the alternative 
      Government is so divided on an issue that affects our aecurity so greatly. We 
      must hope that the A.L.P. Federal Conference shortly to be held endorses the 
      policy recently made by a much wider margin and with less stringent conditions 
      attached. If this is done it may then be possible to heed hr. Calwell's plea 
      not to make defence a political. issue.

