<!--start metadata-->
Title: Army co-operation in wool board research
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 17/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  FOR PRESS                    NO. 5020
          ARMY CO—OPERATION IN WOOL BOARD. RESEARCH
           Statement by the Minister for the Arn.j 
             the Hon, Malcolm Fraser, M.P. 

        The Army is co—operating with the Australian Wool Board to
 provide facilities in Melbourne for tests on the performance of baled wool 
 under high compression.

       Announcing this today, the Minister for the Army,
 Mr. Malcolm Fraser, said the tests would be carried out at the Army Design 
 Establishment, Maribyrnong, commencing on. Monday, September 18.
       A number of bales of wool dumped by high density methods were 
 being deeply frozen, then placed in a heating chamber at the Design
 Establishment. Some would be secured with standard metal strapping, and others 
 without fastening,

       The purpose was to test the behaviour of the high density bales 
 when returned to a normal state,

       It was desired to establish, as a result, the practicability of 
 high density dumping for overseas shipments of wool, as a means of conserving 
 cargo space, consistent with modern shipping methods, It was hoped the tests
 would confirm that wool baled by the high density process `.=i d not suffer 
 damage as a result.

       Mr, Fraser said that the reason the test bales were being frozen 
was that wool shipments to some European countries during winter could freeze 
while lying on docks and in stores awaiting use.

       They would be placed in the heating chamber at the Army Design 
Establishment on Monday and remain there until approximately Thursday,

September 21. It was intended to use a camera with wide angle lens to record 
hourly any changes in the wool bales' size and shape,

      The Army's heat chamber was designed to simulate high temperature 
and high humidity conditions for testing vehicles and other large items of 
equipment in hot/wet and hotjdry climatic conditions. The chamber measured 
23 feet by 50 feet and was constructed of brick with insulated walls,



                              /2.....R..

w



                               2.



               Adjoining the test chamber is the control and recording 

     section from which equipment urdar t atcculd be observed through windows.

               Information supplied by the Wool Board gave the specifications 

     of a conventional dumped bale of wool as approximately 181 cubic feet in 

     volume and approximately 17 lbs. per cubit font density.

               For a high density bale, the volume was from 9 to 11 cubic feet 
    and up to 33 lbs per cubic foot in taensity.

               The tests being carried out by the Wool Board with the use of 

    the Armyis facilities were part of a general attempt to reduce transport costs
    in the Wool Industry.

               ge Army way pleased to be able to co—operate with the industry 

    in making its specialised facilities available on this occasion.




















                                         Lists: A and B

                                         Further information:
                             CANBERRA:  Major E. Ross—Smith
                                        (65-4061) (86-1138)
   17th September, 1967,  OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

