<!--start metadata-->
Title: National health
Description: radio talks
Date: 25/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•                              25 September, 1967

                    NATIOI\TA.Tu iHiaLTH
                Statement by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser

              Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Wannon, said last week 
            that there has been much talk in the Parliament this session about 
            our National Health Scheme. He said that implications of the 
            Opposition's attacks on the existing health services are that everyone's 
            complaints about them would be swept away overnight if the scheme was 
            socialised; that is, if a so—called "free" national health scheme were 
            introduced.
              He then went on to say that a socialised National Health Scheme 
            could in no sense be called "free". It would cost the taxpayers a 
            great deal of money and this cost would be imposed whether they wanted 
            it to be or not.
              The second point he made was that the introduction of a socialised 
            health scheme would certainly not solve the problems which people feel 
            are inherent in, or arise from, our own voluntary health insurance 
            scheme. He mentioned the conclusion of a survey which was published 
            by the Institute of Economic Affairs in London and this was thàt two 
            thirds of the British people do not want to see continued the present 
            arrangement which gives them so—called "free" medical and health 
            services. He made the point that this indicated that socialised health 
            services do not solve everyone's problems.
              He said that there were also many signs to show that the doctors, 
            nurses and technicians who dispensed services under the socialised 
            systems were dissatisfied with them and they could therefore not be 
            expected to give optimum service.
              He also said that the primary aim of the Australian Government is 
            to maintain and develop a system under which the best health services 
            that can be provided by our doctors and hospitals are within the 
            financial reach of every man, woman and child in the community. The 
            scheme enables people to make proper provision while they are healthy 
            against the time when they or their dependants may be ill. Their 
            freedom to choose their own doctor is absolutely safeguarded and there 
            are special arrangements for pensioners, 1,043,000 of whom receive 
            free medical, hospital and pharmaceutical treatment. He said that the 
            Pensioner Medical Service includes not only old age pensioners but many 
            younger people who are in receipt of the invalid pension.

           — 2

    He said the most recent figures show that 76% of the people of 
Australia are covered by medical benefits and that 80 per cent are covered 
by hospital benefits. In addition to this, 8.9% of the population are 
pensioners who receive free health services, and when the people who 
receive free medical and hospital treatment outside the voluntary health 
insurance scheme are taken into consideration (for instance those in the 
Armed Services) almost everyone in Australia is covered under medical and 
hospital benefit schemes. There would therefore seem to be no doubt about 
public acceptance of the principle of voluntary health insurance.
    In reply to those who complain that health insurance is becoming 
too costly he said that last year the patient's share of the average 
medical fee was lower than at any time since the scheme began. One of 
the reasons for the rising health .costs is that the services are being 
constantly improved and are being used more than ever before. He said 
that the highly specialised training and equipment which makes it possible 
for doctors and technicians to provide these improved services will 
inevitably increase their cost. However, the Minister for Health has 
stated that the Government is critically aware of the pressure of costs 
on the National Health Scheme and will continue to do all it can in the 
context of total development priorities to. maintain and extend health 
benefits.
   He said that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme has done immeasurable 
good in relieving financial hardship; it puts within the reach of those 
who need them even the most expensive kind of life—saving and disease— 
preventing drugs, and to some extent pays for .itself in reducing the 
length of hospital 'treatment and absence from employment. This scheme is 
a costly one for various reasons, and the Government is continually 
negotiating with drug companies in an endeavour to effect savings on 
that part of the costs over which the companies have some control. These 
negotiations last year resulted in savings of $3.7 million and the average 
price per prescription was lower last year than in 1962.
   Mr. Fraser said the Government would naturally like to see the cost 
of the scheme reds xl.but it recognises that this is a field in which safety, 
standards and availability of supplies are of paramount importance. The 
increasing costs in this field, as in the others, are a reflection of 
increased services.
   He said the Government has a right to be proud of what it has been 
able to accomplish, but is conscious of the need for development to meet 
changing conditions and circumstances. One such development was announced 
in this Budget when the Treasurer foreshadowed legislation to authorise the 
provision, at a nominal hiring fee, of hearing aids for pensioners by the 
Commonwealth Acoustic Laboratories. There are about 24,000 people, including 
6,000 children, already benefiting from this service and its extension to 
pensioners is a further step forward.

