<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, decentralised ports
Description: Broadcast
Date: 18/03/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


'BROADCAST          3HA SUNDAY 18 MARCH
                    3YB THURSDAY 22 MARCH 
                    3LK WEDNESDAY 21 MARCH

Many extraordinary things have been happening in recent', days. 
Senator Murphy has apparently visited, or raided, ASIO headquarters 
in Melbourne and Canberra. He has not tried to explain why.

Every country, particularly a democracy such as ours, needs to protect 
itself against those who would destroy that democracy.- To do that 
they need information concerning the activities of certain foreign 
powers or of people within Australia who do not believe in a democratic
system of government.

The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation was established by 
earlier Labor Government to do just that. The Director of the OrganisatiO 
has a heavy responsibility. I find it hard to believe that he would not
carry out those responsibilities conscientiously.

It has been suggested in the media that ASIO would not provide informatl,Q 
which could have been related to the safety of a visit from the Yugo 
Prime Minister. Does anyone really believe that?

Senator Murphy will need to explain his actions. He will need to tell 
Australia why he undertook this extraordinary action, and we will need 
to ask ourselves whether or not this is not part of a concerted and 
deliberate attempt to destroy the reputation of ASIO, as the socialist 
left of the Labor Party would want.

Senator Murphy would need to be able to prove that he asked for 
legitimate information and was refused. I do not believe he would 
able to prove that.

This is almost, for Australia, an Alice in Wonderland situation. But 
is much too serious for humour. Until we have an explanation people 
will speculate.
Last Thursday night, Marshall Cooke, the new Member for Petrie, jo- 
in the fight to save decentralised ports.

  2.

  He pointed out that a number of Queensland ports, in his own State, are 
  seriously affected. The levy in Cairns is much higher than in Portland, 
  while Mackay and Rockhampton are also affected. Coffs Harbour and Hobart 
  are seriously affected, and run the risk of losing a. good deal of port'. 
  trade.

  The same can be said of other ports around the Australian coast.

  In case people don't remember what this is all about, let me say thaat~; 
  there's a minimum wage for waterside workers. If there is not enou 
  work through a particular port, that minimum wage must be made up from. 
  levies collected through various port charges.

  Until a few weeks ago, there was a national levy of 40cper man hour. 
  Then, the Association of Employers of Waterside Labour - a body which 
  is alleged to be controlled by overseas shippers and by the container 
  consortium, which is dedicated to the centralisation of trade - made 
  a decision that each port would be entirely responsible for its own 
  levies, and that the system of national averaging would be abolished.

  The effect of this has been to reduce levies in larger ports. In Geelong 
  the levy is reduced from 40 cents to two cents per man hour. In Portland 
  it is increased from 40 to 115 cents per man hour.

  In, terms of general cargo this means the additional levies for loading
• 5,000 tons of bagged wheat in Portland would be over $7,000. In Geelop.g
  the equivalent levy would be under $200.                 This is inequitable, 
  it is unreasonable and it will make the life of the outport.s such as 
  Portland very hard indeed. It is against the National Interest.

  Marshall Cooke from Queensland raised matters, as I had done on
  earlier occasions.          The Minister for Labour, Mr. Cameron, responded 
  with a personal attack on Mr. Cook. After that I also entered the 
  debate again.

I repeated the very serious nature of the situation, and told Mr. Came 
and the Parliament of the decisions taken and unanimously supported at 
the meeting I initiated in Portland last weekend. The Portland Harbor 
Trust already has responses from a number of other ports indicating their
concern.  I emphasised that I was confident'that if Mr. Cameron was. 
prepared to ask the head of the Association of Employers of Waterside 
Labour to come to Canberra, and to tell him that what had been done was 
contrary to the Commonwealth Government's policy, and contrary to the 
spirit of the Stevedoring Industry Charges Act, then I believe the 
decision could be reversed.

Mr. Cameron has responded by saying that he will send a representatii 
to Portland.

I pointed out that the information was known, that there is no need" 
Mr. Cameron to collect additional information, merely a need to exert 
undoubted influence to achieve a reversal of the decision.

The request has been put to him in the name of all of those who were 
at the meeting convened in Portland over the last weekend, which inched,
Labor Members of Parliament. The meeting recognised that the 
responsibility was Mr. Cameron's. I fail utterly to understand why 
he would not express a national Australian point of view to the foreign 
interests alleged to control the Association of Employers of Waterside 
Labour.

We haven't heard the end of this story by any means, and I willbe 
pursuing it further.

