<!--start metadata-->
Title: 11-15 September
Description: Reports on proceedings in Canberra - radio talk 
Date: 23/09/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               4?.~i !'~~~R itf.P. ' FOR 
         ORT~ ~ ~ ~ CL I3 G ~ C


        Thp House of representatives has now been sitting for three 

weeks. By far the greater part of that time has been devoted to debate 

on the Government's Budget. Many Members from both sides have spoken.
        Government Members have been in general happy and wholehearted 

supportera of what the Treasurer has done in his efforts to maintain our 

rate of growth and development as a nation. In this is included the 

important immigration programme and, of course, financial assistance 
for the States. X have Already heard some people criticise the 

Government because it has budgeted for a surplus of over í:10O nillion. 

In actual fact all of this money is earmarked for two purposes. The 

first is to guarantee State loan funds raised under the auspices of the
Loan Council. This has been necessary because Governments have found 

it almost impossible to raise all the capital funds they require from 
the loan market and therefore the Federal Goverment has adopted the 

practice of guaranteeing these loans for State works, up to a curtain 

limit, out of current revenue. The second reason for the surplus is 

this: Large sins of wartime loans are falling due this year and it is 

almost certain that they cannot be net by further calls on the loan 

market and therefore the Government has had to provide for them out 

of current revenue. These two item: I have mentioned will absorb all 

the budget surplus. 

            Various Government members brought up matters in the 

House that they themselves in their own judgment felt had not been 

fully answered by the budget.
            This doesn't necessarily mean any wide divergence of 

opinion from the Government. It is merely the individual back-benaher% 
exercising his proper right to say what he believes to be true. Subject 

mentioned in this way were the problem of people on fixed incomes and

the harm done them under inflation. This is a real problem that no 

country in the world has fully mastered as yet. I believe that it is 

one that requires a great deal of work and research before the true 

incidence of .hardship can be judged and the best way of meeting it feuni . 
Let me show what I Steen. It is possible for a married couple, tD th 

on the pension to get £15 a week (f4 each pension and E3/10/- permissible

income) and own their pwn home. It is also true that a pensioner

                          SW    e
man or womanipmay have just the bare pension of 2,4 and nothing else. 
Govexnment aid to both is equal but the very real hardship of one is 
not comparable to the comparative well being of the other. We have 
a lot to learn yet about social services and national well being and 
the manner in which available funds are Liven the needy. It is 
worth remembering that over £2ŒM. - a fifth of the Federal budget 
is spent on social services.
             In Liz Budget debate I made some criticism of the fact 
that I felt that ue were trying to do too much in too short a time. 
I gave a shetrt summery of my talk last week in which I said we should 
slow our rate of pregress a oertuiri amount so we can consolidate our 
position, master inflation and make more progress with some essential 
cepital works, like roadstinside Australia.
             I 'ass disappointed with the aajority of the speeches 
from the Opposition. bet:oboe. They dealt with matters that are 
important and they criticiaed the harm inflation is obviously having 
on certain sections of tho colmalnity but they did notoffer constructive 
sugE,estions about how they thought we should be tackling our problems. 
They should really have done this for their criticism to be fully. 
useful. Kim Beazley from Western :Alstralia was one of the exceptions 
to th lki1C. Be made an interesting critical analysis of our 
;oresent position.e Th.e shadow of Suez has been on ere Members' 
mind for the last two weeks. The future of the British Commonwealth 
coal.: well. Wing in the belanee. There is little I can say on this 
but I do want to tell you, the people or Weapon, thet it is occupying 
the minds and thoughts of ifembera more than anything else.
             One final tning. If any' of you are puzzled ovex the 
points I tried to make in ;ay budget speeeh, I do hope you'll get in
touch with me.    I beliw: tLE/ reiidpoTtnt.
                         ameork.• 

