<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1963/64 Budget
Description: press statement
Date: 1/09/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEIENT:

MALCOLM FRASER


                                                   September 1st, 1963



                                    1963/64 BUDGET

               Last week I spoke about those aspects of the Budget which 
have a particular impact on rural industries. Today I am going to talk 
about other aspects of the Budget which affect many different individuals.

SOCIAL SERVICES

               In the field of Social Services some significant alterations
have been made.   According to the records of the Department of Social 
Services 516,000 out of nearly 800,000 pensioners are single pensioners. 
For quite some time it has been recognised that single pensioners have a 
much more difficult time than a married couple who are both getting the
full pension.  Thus, single pensioners are having 10/- a week added to 
their pension bringing the standard rate for a single pensioner to
£5.15.0. per week.  Pensioners whose wife or husband does not receive 
a pension or allowance will count as a single person for purposes of the 
increase.

               In addition to the new standard rate of £5.15.0., widow 
pensioners with one or more children will receive an additional £2.0.0. 
per week by way of a Mother's allowance, and will also be paid an allowance
of 15/- per week for their oldest or only child. :11 widows with one or 
more children will, through these measures; receive an increase of £3. per
week in the pensions now payable to them.   The total payment for a widow 
with one child will be £8.10.0. per week at the new standard rate together 
with the allowances, and this will be increased by 15/- a week for each
child after the first.  Widows without children will receive an increase 
of 10/- a week, bringing their rate to £5.2.6. per week.

               Combined pensions payable to a married couple who are both 
pensioners will remain at £10.10.0. per week.

               In addition to these measures, it should always be borne in 
mind that the great majority of pensioners do not have to worry about 
medical expenses. Free hospital, medical and pharmaceutical benefits 
are provided for the great majority. This must remove one of the real 
concerns for elderly people who are more likely to require medical attention 
than younger people.

               To conform with the Government's proposal to increase by 
10/- a week the age allowance for single people, it is proposed that the 
age allowance exemption for single aged persons should also be increased 
by £26. The new exemption for these people will therefore be £481, which 
is equal to the sum of the proposed age pension for a single person to- 
gether with the permissible income.

               In addition, the Government has decided to adopt the 
recommendation of the Commonwealth Committee on Taxation to extend the 
married couples' provision to an aged person whose spouse is not of 
pensionable age. As a result, the aged person would be exempt from income 
tax regardless of the age of the wife or her husband if their combined net 
incomes do not exceed £910.

               There are some other small increases being made to pensions
that are paid to different people. The additional cost of these pensions 
and allowances is estimated to amount to over £17 m. for a full year.


                                                                /2.

                                  -   2

                    would like to draw particular notice to one of these 
       proposals. For some time, the Government has carried out a policy of 
       subsidising the building of Homes for elderly people on the basis of £2. 
       from the Commonwealth for every £1. raised locally. This kind of 
       provision is now being extended to cover the provision of accommodation 
       for disabled people working in a sheltered workshop so that they can reside 
       near their place of employment,

                   Total pensions payable in this year will be increased from 
       £379m, to £411m., i.e., an increase of £32m,

       REPATRIATION PENSIONS:

                   Changes are also being made in the Repatriation benefits. 
       The special rate war pension for T.P.I. ex-servicemen has been increased 
       by 10/- per week to £3,3.15.0 per week; The domestic allowance payable 
       to war widows who are over 50 years of age and who are permanently un- 
       employable or who have a child under the age of 1.6 years or over that age 
       but who are still undergoing approved education will be increased from 
       £3. 2. 6. to £3.10.0. per week.

                   There is to be an overall increase of 15% in the education 
•      allowance payable in respect of children under the Soldiers° Children 
       Education Scheme other than professional students.

                   There will be increases in certain Service pensions which 
       follow upon increases approved to Social Service pensioners. The single 
       Service pensioner will receive 10/-- a week extra, bringing his pension to
       £5.15.O. per weeks The Service pension payable to a wife is also to be 
       increased from £2. 7. 6. per week to £3 per week.

                   These proposals will cost over £2m. a year.

                   War and. Repatriation benefits will cost £123m. in this 
       financial year, i.e., an increase of very nearly £12m. over last year.

                   Social service and Repatriation pensions together are now 
       costing £530m. In 1962/63 the total individual income tax collected 
       by the Commonwealth was £541m., only £11m. more than the payments that will 
       be made in this coming year to Social Service pensioners and those receiving 
       Repatriation benefits.

       MISCELIANEOUS :

                   Individual citizens are going to be assisted by the abolition 
       of sales tax on all foodstuffs except confectionery. This will cost 
       £1l m. in a full year.

                   The minimum taxable income is being increased from the present
       £105. to £209.

                   Other anomalies have been removed in the taxing law. Under 
       the present law, if a student child receives any Government assistance such 
       as a Commonwealth scholarship, the amount that the parent is allowed to 
       deduct for taxation purposes is reduced by the amount of Government 
       assistance paid to the child.

                   In future, Government assistance or Commonwealth scholarships 
       up to a value of £65 a year will not reduce the value of the parent's
       deductions.  In addition to this, which I think I might have mentioned 
       last week, the allowable deduction for taxation purposes for education 
       has been increased from £100. to £150.


                                                                    /3.

                          The average citizen will also be assisted by the decision 
        to remove the limit on taxation deductions for medical expenses. It has 
        been pointed out to the Government that if a person becomes really sick in 
        any one year, that is the year in which their income will be reduced and in 
        which they need all the benefit they can get from taxation deductions to
        assist in paying medical expenses. Therefore, the Government has thought 
        it reasonable to remove any limit to this purpose.

                          Many of these alterations are in themselves small ones 
        but they are ones that could well have a significant effect on those 
        sections of the community that they are designed to assist.




                                    ----c06--


•


















•

