<!--start metadata-->
Title: Decentralisation, regional development
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 24/09/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    3HA - Sunday, 24 September 
                    3YB - Thursday, 28 September 
    BROADCAST       3LK - Wednesday, 27 September



        For a long time country people have complained, and 
    I believe often with some justification, that decentralisation 
    has been nothing but a political catchcry.

        I know that Governments have implemented measures 
    over the years, but it has been an uphill battle against 
    Australia's natural growth of the major cities at the expense 
    of the country.

        Last week the Prime Minister announced the
    Commonwealth Government's proposals which I believe should 
    have a major impact on the whole problem of growth in rural 
    areas. The new regional development proposals will complement 
    the Victorian Government's decentralisation measures announced 
    earlier in the month.

        We will be establishing a new National Urban Regional 
    Development Authority which will have among its major 
    objectives, the development of regional growth centres.

        I will enlarge on the proposals in a moment, but 
    before I do I want to say that decentralisation is an
    objective which has advantages to both the city and country 
•   dweller.

        It helps to maintain our country way of life at a 
    time when many of us feel that is under threat. But it also 
    offers further opportunities to relieve the growing concentration 
    of population, industry and commercial activities in existing 
    major cities.

        A report by a committee of Commonwealth and State 
    officials has concluded that the only type of decentralisation 
    which offers significant prospects of success is selective 
    decentralisation.




                         .../2

                         - 2 -

               The Commonwéalth will pursue this course but it will 
        be by no means a simple process. Ways and means will have 
        to be devised to attract to the selected locations the 
        employment and industries which would be basic to their 
        establishment and their faster growth.

               This will be a co-ordinated programme, financially, 
        and in other ways with the States, directed towards fostering 
        a better balance of population distribution and regional 
        development in Australia. The Commonwealth's programme would 
        be separate from, and additional to, present State programmes 
        encouraging decentralisation.
•              There will be a Ministerial Council established, 
        consisting of the Prime Minister and Premiers. This will be 
        the principal body for consultation and co-ordination in 
        the fields of regional and urban development.

               Our own Commonwealth machinery will provide for the 
        establishment of the National Urban and Regional Development 
        Authority which I have already mentioned. The Commonwealth 
        also has in mind the establishment of an advisory committee 
        or committees where they are necessary and these will include 
        members of various organisations and groups chosen for their 
        expertise in their relevant fields.
•              Co-operation and co-ordination with the States are
        vital components of the new proposals. The Victorian Government
        is establishing a new Department of Development and Decentralisation.
        The State's decentralisation plans include dividing the State
        into regions each with a capital and several other centres as
        district headquarter towns. Among other measures will be
        positive financial initiatives for decentralised industry.

               Recent specific measures that the Commonwealth have 
        taken must not be overlooked here. We have recently announced 
        special financial initiatives for country employers engaging
        new apprentices. Beginning next year a subsidy of $194 a year 
        for each new apprentice will be paid to metropolitan employers

                                               .../3

                -3



    and $388, exactly double the city rate, to country employers.


         The double rate for country employers aims to make 
    a decided impact on apprenticeship opportunities for young 
    people in country centres and to help those country centres 
    meet their needs for tradesmen.


         The special living-away-from-home allowances for 
    country apprentices will be continued and extended to cover 
    country apprentices in all trades.


         The Commonwealth believes it is important to define 
    the relationships, roles and contributions which will 
•   characterise future co-operation between the Commonwealth and 
    the States if effective action is to be taken to cope with 
    the problems of the cities and to promote regional development.


         This kind of partnership should make a major 
    contribution to improving the quality of life in the Australian 
    community.








•

