<!--start metadata-->
Title: ELSA
Description: press statement
Date: 9/03/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


r   PRESS STATEMENT       9th March. 1961.

               ELS A.
        MALCOLM FRASER has advised that the Postmaster- 
    General has now given him details of the re-zoning of ELSA 
    for those areas west of Casterton.
        Malcolm Fraser said he had received requests that 
    Dergholm residents be given local call access to Casterton; 
    Lake Mundi residents be given local call access to Casterton, 
    and Dorodong residents be given local call access to Penola, 
    and that Poolagielo residents should have local call access 
    to either Casterton or Naracoorte.
        In addition, Dorodong residents have made representa- 
    tions to him to have trunk call charges between Dorodong and 
    Naracoorte reduced.
        These representations to the Department have been 
    successful. The details of the changes are as follows:--
        In the Casterton area, zones have been re-arranged 
    to give local call access from Dergholm and Lake Mundi to 
    Casterton; from Poolaigelo to Naracoorte, and from Dorodong 
    to 7ratt onbully.
        Dorodong local call access to Penola is preserved.
        The trunk rate for calls from Dorodong to Naracoorte 
    will be reduced from Lv'- to 1/$d. day rate for each three 
    minutes. Similar reductions would be made from Dergholm or 
    Lake Mundi to Naracoorte,
        As a result of the &e zoning alterations, Dergholm 
    subscribers will gain local call access to all exchanges 
    in the Casterton, Edenhope, Harrow and Coojar zones, but trunk 
    rates will apply to the occasional call which may be made to 
    exchanges in the Coonawarra and Penola zones. Poolaigelo 
    subscribers will gain local call access to all exchanges 
    in the Naracoorte, y"k ratt onbully and Coonawarra zones, and the

                        -2-
Lake Mundi local service area will be extended to include
the exchanges in the Casterton and Strathdownie zones.
         In addition, Dorodong subscribers gain local call
access to all exchanges in the Wrattonbully zone.
         Malcolm Fraser said that he regretted that, because
these changes cannot legally be effected until Executive 
approval has been obtained to the necessary amendments to the
telephone regulations and the appropriate notification 
published in the Commonwealth Gazette, it was unlikely that
these revised zones and charges would be introduced before
15th May,Malcolm Fraser said that he regretted the delay 
that had occurred in solving the anomalies that had arisen 
in the introduction of ELSA. He said that they had occurred 
very largely because, up till Christmas, the Department was 
trying to overcome these anomalies with officers who had to 
carry out all their normal duties at the same time. It was 
only since Christmas that officers had been given the job of
exclusively solving these anomalies. Although in some areas 
the anomalies had been done away with before Christmas. This
in general was in areas where the problems were simpler. Up to
3 weeks ago he said he knew that there were still complains 
from the Postmaster-General's own electorate that had not been
adjusted,Malcolm Fraser said he hoped that when the new
 arrangements were brought into operation they would be 
 satisfactory to everyone in this area. He said he expected 
 adjustments in the Hamilton and Coleraine areas to follow
 vary shortly,

