<!--start metadata-->
Title: Trip to Indonesia
Description: press statement
Date: 5/02/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEINiENT
NALCOLM FRASER s

                                                   February 5th,1965


                   Malcolm Fraser said he was leaving for Indonesia on
Tuesday, February 9th, for one week. The purpose of the visit was to speak 
to as many leading Indonesians as possible in both the civil and military fields. 
He said he was undertaking this trip on his own initiative because of a growing 
and increasing concern at the direction of Indonesian policies. Therefore, he 
wanted to make his own assessment first hand of the feelings, motives and. 
objectives of the Indonesian leaders.
                   In particular, he said he wanted to make some examination 
of the course that Indonesian leadership would take after President Soekarno. 
Australia cannot ignore the fact that over the last several years the anti- 
communist or Moslem political parties have been largely suppressed while the 
communist party has grown from a few thousand members to three million. Only 
recently an attempt by the anti-communist forces to form some kind of united 
position was thwarted by the President himself.
                   We must add two other factors to this growth of the 
communist party. Firstly, Indonesia's international forces have been isolating 
her from the West and drawing her inevitably closer to Peking and, secondly, it 
would appear that General Nasution,repuutedly avowed anti-communist, has not the 
power and prestige that he once had. There is some suggestion that officers 
sympathetic to him have been appointed to other posts and that officers perhaps 
more sympathetic to the communist cause are taking their place. If this is so 
an army that the West once believed to be firmly anti-communist might well find 
itself in a frame of mind in which it would come to agreement with the
communists in Indonesia over future Indonesian leadership. If this is correct 
only some unforeseen event can prevent Indonesia becoming a communist nation. 
Even though confrontation itself may make it impossible to maintain the friendly 
relations that we would like with Indonesia the problems of living alongside 
this country would be intensified under current leadership. Australia may 
have to learn to live alongside a communist country. This, in itself, will 
require skill and leadership, resolution and determination from Australia. 
Malcolm Fraser said he wanted to make his own judgment on these and other
matters in Indonesia.

