<!--start metadata-->
Title: Waterfront debate
Description: press statement
Date: 10/10/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT;

MALCOLM FRASER

                                                    October lOth,1965


                           WATERFRONT DEBATE


             The full debate on the waterfront showed, I think, two 
things. The Opposition is not really sure of its ground, because it 
moved only one broad amendment. The Committee stages of the Bill were 
not challenged at all, and it is significant that neither the Australian 
Council of Trade Unions nor the Labour Party itself have made any real 
point about those provisions of the Bill which place responsibility 
for recruitment ofwaterfront labour in the hands of the Australian
Stevedoring Industry Authority, instead of in the Federation. This 
will, of course, quite markedly reduce the power of the Federation, as 
it has demonstrated that it cannot and will not, use this power 
responsibly. No other Union in Australia has ever been given this 
authority in this way.

             The Opposition tried to concentrate its attack, insofar as 
it could, on those provisions which could lead to de-registration of the 
Waterside ?•:orkers' Federation.

             I want to point out two matters in relation to this.

             De-registration cannot take place unless a properly 
constituted tribunal makes a decision that it is warranted. Even then 
de-registration does not follow automatically. It would depend upon the 
way the Federation behaved, and the ultimate decision would rest upon the 
Governor-General in Council, that is upon the Government.

             The second point I want to emphasise is this

             De-registration would not affect the working conditions or 
the rights of individual watersiders. The provisions of the legislation 
are not aimed at the great bulk of the 22,000 members of the Federation, 
but at the hard-core communist leadership which dictates policies,
especially in Sydney and Melbourne.  Many of the smaller ports which have 
not had this kind of leadership have had good retords of industrial
responsibility.   I believe that a great many trade unionists will welcome 
the action that has been taken, because the irresponsibility of the 
Federation's leadership has certainly put up costs to every person in 
Australia.

             One or two interesting points came out of the debate. 
Speeches by present day Labour Party Leaders were quoted in relation to 
the great Coal Strike rf 1949. At that time Mr. Calwell said -
                                                             "It became evident that the communist party, through the members of the 
Miners' Federation who are communists, was determined to force an issue 
in the depths of the winter and cause the maximum inconvenience to the
Australian people 

             It was all a part of a plan, although we did not know it 
then, to force upon the Australian people a strike that has no association 
with the working conditions of the miners, the majority of whose leaders 
are communists."

He also said - "They (that is the miners' leaders) ask them to adopt 
direct action at the expense of their fellow unionists and the community 
generally. Well, the Australian Labour party repudiates the whole of 
that manoeuvre....


                                                                    /2

i





                                          2 —



                    All that goes to show that the communist section of the 
      miners' leaders is not at all interested in securing improvements in the 
      coal industry but is anxious to get control of the industry so that, 
      when the time seems propitious, they will be able to carry out the
      dictates of the Cominform.     The aim of the Cominform is to make the 
      nations allied to the Western democracies weaker in production."

                    Er. Calwell also said — "Under the dictatorship of the 
      communists in their Union they have decided to hold this community to 
      ransom at the most difficult period of the year ....

                    Everyone knows that this is not an industrial trouble in 
      the real sense of the word. It is an attempt by the Communist Party to 
      exploit the situation of the miners for the purpose of destroying this 
      Government, if possible, and of demonstrating to the miners and others 
      that they have a blackmailing power which, if used sufficiently ruthlessly, 
      can bring success to the communist cause."

                    Senator McKenna, the Labour Leader of the Senate, said - 
      "The strike should never have occurred and it would not have taken place 
      but for the activity of the communist element in certain of the Unions 
      concerned."

                    These quotations were directed to the Coal Miners' Strike 
      of 1949. With equal truth they could be directed to the behaviour of 
      the Waterside Workers' Federa ion in recent years. The fact that the 
      Australian Labour Party has adopted an attitude which can only be 
      construed as supporting the Federation shows how far the Labour Party
      has travelled in the years since 1949.     The debate in the House of 
      Representatives and in the Senate demonstrated more clearly than ever 
      the need for the legislation that the Government has introduced.




                                         o 0o

