<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam gallantry awards
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 28/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


'EMBARGO : NOT TO BE PUBLISHED OR BROADCAST BEFORE MIDNIGHT, EST, 
                    TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 1967.


FOR PRESS                                     No. 4812

                 VIETNAM GALLANTRY AWARDS
                                                    I
            Statement by the Minister for the Army, V
               The Hon. Malcolm Fraser, MP

     Nineteen awards to Australian soldiers for gallantry in Vietnam 

have been approved by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth.

     Announcing this today, the Minister for the Army; Mr Malcolm 

Fraser, said that 17 of the decorations were Mention in Despatches 

(one posthumous), and two Queen's Commendations.

     Of the 19 awards, 10 were won by members of 5th Battalion, the 

Royal Australian Regiment.

Recipients were:

MID (Posthumous)    Corporal Norman James Womal, 28, married, 

formerly of Holsworthy and a member of 5 RAR..

MID - Major Malcolm Bruce McQualter, 29, married, formerly of 

       Bairnsdale, Victoria, a Company Commander with 5 RAR who 

       died of wounds on March 5, 1967.

       Major Paul Netherton Greenhalgh, 31, single, of Currumbini 

       Queensland, a Company Commander with 5 RAP.

       Major Owen Maxwell Carroll, 35, married, of Holsworthy, NSW, 

       a Company Commander with 5 RAR.

       Captain Jack Newman, 28 married, of Aspley, Queensland, 

       (RAAOC) a member of 1st Australian Logistic Support Group. 

       Captain Peter James Isaacs, 26, married, of Isle of Wight, 

       UK, Adjutant of 5 RAR.

       Lieutenant John Curtis Hartley, 24, single, of Woombye, Qland, 

       a Platoon Commander with 5 RAR.

       Captain Peter John Edwards, 27, married, of Wacol, Q'land, 

      Officer Commanding 1st Division Postal Unit Detachment. 

      W02 Gordon Cedric Reynolds, 43, married, of Sorrento, Vic. 

      (RAASC) a member of 1st Australian Logistic Support Group. 

      WO2 John Henry Bates, 33, married, of Holsworthy, NSW, a 

      company sergeant-major with 5 RAR.

      WO2 Cyril Claude Carruthers, 38, married, of Wodonga, Vic., 

      (RAASC) Depot Sergeant Major of 2nd Composi iP Ordnance-Depot.
      (now serving in Victoria).

               2.

 MIDs cont'd
 • Sergeant Ashley Graham Urquhart, 25, married, of Nollamara,
   W.A., a member of 3rd Special Air Service Squadron.
 • Sergeant Francis Xavier Alcorta, 31, married, of Newmarket,
   Brisbane, a member of 6 RAR,
 • Corporal William Richard Moore, 25, married of Stafford,
   Brisbane, a member of 6 RAR.
   Private William Roy Cavanagh, 21, married, of Wollahra, NSW, 
   a member of 5 RAR.
   Private Sydney Lawrence Shore, 21, single, of Swan Hill, Vic.,
   a member of 5 RAP.
 ^ Private Lawrence Victor Lewis, 25, married, of Holsworthy, NSW,
   a member of 5 RAR. (now stationed in New South Wales).

Queen's Commendation
   Second Lieutenant Robert William Askew, 27, married, of West
   Guildford, NSW, (RAEME), a pilot with 161st (Independent) 
   Reconnaissance Flight.
   Private Peter Charles Smith, 20, single, of Elizabeth ';'Jest, 
  SA., a member of 6 PAR.


    Extracts from citations are attached.

                     Lists A, B, C.
                  Further information
              Canberra - Maj. Allan S. Hinds
                   (65-4061) (49-6030)
              Other States - PRO at Command HQ
28 March 1967.

 Mention in Despatches (Posthumous)

 • Corporal Norman James Womal, was mortally wounded by a sniper
        section of
 when leading his/5th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, to clear

 a Viet Cong ambush on October 17, 1966. From the position where 

 he fell Corporal Womal continued to control the covering fire of 

 his section machine gun.. in spite of a large volume of accurate 
 enemy fire from several positions which prevented Corporal Womal's 

 section from moving, he propped himself on one elbow in an exposed 
 position to indicate by voice to his platoon commander the exact 

 location of the enemy and continued to direct the section machine 

 gun fire onto the enemy,. Corporal 'Ronal died after being evacuated. 
 His efforts contributed directly to the successful extrication of 

 his section without further casualties.
 Mention in Despatches

 • Maj. Paul Netherton Greenhaigh is a company commander with the 

 5th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment. During operations he 

 showed complete-disregard for his own safety on numerous occasions 
 when in contact with the enemy in order that his troops would 

 receive the best possible support from him. He set a high standard 

 and fine example to his men at all times.,

 • Maj. Malcolm Bruce McQualter (since died of wounds) as a
 company commander with the 5th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, 
 for eight months, at all times and particularly when in contact 

 with the enemy set a fine example by his courage and disregard for 

 his personal safety. He placed the welfare, morale and safety of

 his men above all other requirements and unselfishly devoted his 
 entire energies to the requirements of his soldiers.

  Maj. Owen Maxwell Carroll served as Operations Officer and a 

 company commander with the 5th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment. 

 As Operations Officer he set a high standard by his devotion to 

 duty, ability and coolness under fire on a number of occasions. 
 As a company commander he provided excellent leadership on all 

occasions and the highr::or la and first class performance of his 
company is directly attributed to his efforts.

     MID (contd)
     •    Captain Jack Newman, as a Staff Captain on Headquarters, 1st 
     Australian Logistic Support Group, displayed an ability to learn 
     quickly and adapt himself to an entirely new sphere of activity in 
     a highly commendable fashion. In the execution of his duties he 
     displayed commonsense, an ability to work hard for extremely long
   .periods without rest, and a dedication to the tasks involved which 
    was.,_.exemplary..

         Captain Peter James Isaacs, acted in the dual capacity—of unit 
    Adjutant and Assistant Operations Officer since the 5th_Battalion, 
    Royal,,,AustralianRegiment entered operations in..Vietnam-. He' 
    cheerfully parried. out all tasks pre-sgnt,e-d to him while continuous 
    oper-ations._necessitated long. hours of:-work under_ extremely arduous .. 
   conditions. His coolness,. ability-„an.d .,readiness..to accept
   _responsibility have contributed greatly to .both the operational 
   and administrative efficiency of the unit.
   •    Lieutenant John Curtis Hartley. On July 9, 1966 during- 
   Operation Sydney, Lt. Hartley's platoon was in the process of 
   taking up a defensive position to protect company headquarters 
   when six to eight Viet Cong were seen in fire positions waiting 
   for the platoon. In the resulting firefight.It.. Hartley moved- 
 . to the section being engaged and with complete dis.regard.f.or.his
   own safety-contralled the fire of the section and moved the. 
  remainder of.the.platoon into position to dominate the enemy. 
  Within .a matter of minutes the enemy broke and fled. During the 

  engagement Lt. Hartley was wounded but led his platoon in a sweep 
  of the area. The personal courage and leadership of Lt. Hartley 
 on this and previous occasions were of a high standard.
 •    Captain Peter John Edwards established and operated the postal 
 facilities within the Vietnam theatre. He succeeded, through 

determination and_.conscientious dedication to his duties, to 
maintain postal. facilities at the most efficient level attainable.
The outstanding performance of the postal unit its high morale 
and willingness.and ability to work tirelessly to provide service 
for the combat area exemplifies the high order of leadership 
exercised by Captain Edwards.

               -5-
   W02 Gordon Cedric Reynolds, as chief clerk and company 
 Sergeant Major of Headquarters, 1st Logistic Support Group, had
 constantly produced w:)rk of the highest quality through selfless
 devotion to duty coupled with an unusual degree of mental and 
 physical vigour.
   NO2 John Henry Bates, as a company Sergeant Major with the 5th 
 Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, has shown coolness and 
 courage when in contact with the enemy and the standards he has 
 set at all times on operations inspired all ranks and contributed 
 to the high morale and efficiency of his company.
   üti02 C ril Claude Carruthers was Depot Sergeant Major of 2nd 
 CompositeOrdnance Depot during its formative stages. During 
 his time with the unit he had proved an inspiration to all members 
 by his devotion to duty, enthusiasm to get difficult jobs done, 
 and drive to bring out the soldierly qualities in all ranks. He 
 is a fine example of a soldier who puts service before all else.
   Sergeant Ashley Graham Urquhart displayed skill, leadership 
 and coolness resulting in the killing of six Viet Cong when his 
 four-man fighting patrol of rd SAS Squadron ambushed an
 emeny patrol in the Nui Dinh Hills on July 27, 1966. The area 
 was infested with enemy and Sergeant Urquhart successfully 
 achieved a withdrawal despite enemy pursuit, His action was an 
 inspiration to his patrol and to his Squadron.
   Sergeant Francis Xavier Alcorta was acting Platoon Commander 
 when a flanking platoon of the 6th Battalion, :Royal Australian 
 Regiment made contact with a party of about ten Viet Cong in the
 Nui Bao Quan Hills on 14 September 1966, Anticipating his company 
 Commander's intention he immediately led his platoon in an attack 
which killed three Viet Cong, wounded several more and routed
the remainder. By his correct reading of the battle and excellent 
leadership, he not only destroyed the enemy, but set an exemple 
of first class leadership and bravery while under fire.

-6-
•	
Corporal `'s!illiam Richard Moore commanded a section of the 6th
Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment when his platoon encountered  
a small group of enemy near the village of Long Tan on .august 18,  
1966. When the platoon followed the withdrawing enemy they came  
under extremely heavy fire and were forced to take up a defensive  
position. The enemy force of at least company strength repeatedly  
assaulted the platoon position mostly against the sector held by  
Corporal Moore and his eight-man section.. Corporal Moore remained  
calm and directed the fire of his section with such good effect  
that each enemy attack was repulsed with heavy casualties.
Private William Roy Cavanagh
^	
Private	
Lawrence	
) Both members of the 5th
rivate Sane
y" y awrence Shore )
Battalion, Royal Australian
Regiment, had shown complete disregard for personal safety while  
assisting in the removal of the second pilot of an RA `!.F helicopter  
which crashed in Phuoc Tuy province on October 18, 1966. Fire  
broke out in the Iriquois helicopter of 9 Squadron seconds after  
the crash and the presence of crew weapons, aircraft armament and  
a quantity of explosives posed a significant threat to those  
performing rescue operations. A RA AF crewman had rescued some  
occupants of the aircraft and under his guidance Privates
Cavanagh and Shore assisted with bare-handed clearance of
obstacles and parts of the nose section to free the trapped second
pilot, before the spreading fire engulfed the nose section.
•	
Private Lawrence Victor Lewis was a stretcher bearer attached
to a platoon of 5th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment on June 19,  
1966, when the platoon came under enemy mortar fire which killed
two and wounded four men. Pte. Lewis moved forward under fire,  
with complete disregard for his own safety to treat the dying
and wounded. He worked unceasingly and untiringly to save the lives
of the wounded and was a constant source of comfort and reassurance  
to them. But for his cool-headedness and quick thinking their  
injuries could have become far more serious.


~ ) •          _7_
 queen's Commendation
   Second Lieutenant Robert William Askew as pilot of an Army 
 helicopter displayed calm and professional handling of a sudden 
 and potentially hazardous situation when faced with an immediate 
 emergency landing following an engine failure. In an area of 
 flooded rice fields, rain sodden crops and jungle, he flew 
 his powerless helicopter onto a narrow dirt road. His action 
 prevented further damage to the helicopter and reflected great 
 credit on his personal flying skill.
   Private Peter Charles Smith leaped into the flooded Suoi Da 
 Bang River on October 5, 1966, to rescue a soldier of 6th Battalion, 
 Royal Australian Regiment who had been swept away by the strong 
 current. The company was crossing the river by pulling themselves 
 hand over hand along a rope when one soldier lost his grip and 
 could not stay afloat because of the heavy pack he was wearing. 
 Private Smith, was standing on the far bank and promptly and 
 unhesitatingly jumped into the river with no regard to his own 
 safety. He supported the soldier as they were swept rapidly 
 downstream until he was able to grasp a bush jutting out from the 
 bank. Pte. Smith supported the soldier until help arrived. His 
 brave action had averted an almost certain tragedy.

