<!--start metadata-->
Title: World economic downturn
Description: electoral talk
Date: 18/04/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               PRIME MINfSTEFt

FOR MEDIA                          APRIL 18 1982


                    ELECTORATE TALK

One of our important responsibilities is to present a balanced, 
realistic view of where our economy stands, and of the prospects 
which lie ahead. People have a right to expect that the various 
elements bearing on Australia's economic position will be
explained in a rational way, so that the whole picture emerges 
and can be understood. Balance, stability - they are the keys 
to keeping Australia's economy on course, not only in the
public presentation of the position but also in the substance 
of responsible economic management.

Australia does not function in isolation. When the economies 
of the major industrialised nations strike trouble, then that 
is reflected in Australia. We are affected by the slackening 
demand for our products in those countries. We are affected 
by the levels of interest rates in Europe and America. The unhappy 
truth is that the economy of several of these major countries 
is not growing. Not only that, but in some instances, they are 
actually producing less.

There are many economic indicators, but I think the plight 
of the United States' motor car industry illustrates the
position quite dramatically. Four years ago, the United States 
produced 15 million vehicles. Last year, they produced half that 
- seven and a half million. Imagine the impact of that change
on jobs, people's spending, the suppliers of metals, and so on.

In the face of a world economic downturn, Australia has done 
comparatively well. Our economy has grown faster than the 
average rate of other major industrialised countries in 
recent years. Business investment growth in Australia was 
at its highest for 30 years in the last financial year. 
After-tax real incomes have been rising in Australia and 
more jobs have been created. In the three years to last 
February, almost 380,000 new jobs were created in Australia.

We know that we can succeed in Australia against world trends.
We cannot avoid being influenced by those trends, but there
is much we can do ourselves to meet the challenge of keeping
Australia's economy on course in the face of difficult international
conditions. For the Government's part, it is committed to
providing stable, reliable government, the kind of government
that inspires confidence among business people, large and small,
in Australia and overseas. That is fundamental.


                                                ../2

               2



At the same time, the Government must be sufficiently flexible 
to respond to changing economic circumstances internationally 
and at home. As a nation, it is vitally important that we 
recognise ourselves as an integral part of the world market 
place in which we must compete to sell our wares. We must be 
reliable suppliers of quality goods at the right price. At a 
time when the market for so many goods is very tight indeed, 
we are jeopardising our competitiveness. Put bluntly, this 
is a time for containing costs. This is not a time for 
shortening working hours. Nor is it a time for substantial 
wage increases when in some other countries people are actually 
accepting reduced wages in order to preserve jobs. This is 
not a time for talking the economy up or talking it down. 
This is a time for sound economic management, for stability 
and reliability.

It is a time to recognise our achievements in the face of 
a world downturn and to accept the challenge of keeping 
Australia competitive in the difficult period ahead.





             ---o0o---

