<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr McMillan's visit
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 23/02/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                          3HA - 23rd Feb. 
                                          3YB - 26th Feb.




          This is my first talk this year and I am vey glad 

to be back on the air over this station reporting directly
to you the electors of Wannon.   Ix
          As you know in this coming week Parliament is re- 

assembling at Canberra, and I will be speaking weekly over this 

Station at this time, reporting directly frmm the national

capital.     But this week I want to say a few words on the 

recent visit of the Prime Minister of treat Britain, Mr. Macmillan, 

to this country and the significance of his visit in future 

Commonwealth relations.
            This is the first time in which a British Prime 

Minister has visited this country during his term of office
Other ritm Ministers =av: been here but the • _ , a c• more 
as 'hg: esmen afte they hey loft or bee - moved out * the im

         âs af` that highest o ,all o

    (L____- Mr. Macmillan has quite clearly made a great

 impression upon the Australian people by his friendliness,

 his frankness 8rd from the manner in which he has expressed

 himself and put fori.ard views on some of the wen's most

 difficult problems.
            On his way to Australia Mr. Macmillan called in at

 India and Pakistan, important manbers of the British Commonwealth

 of Nations. 1.There have been people inside the British Common-

 wealth who would almost prefer that certain member countries of the
 Commonwealth were not in the Commonwealth. India has perhaps

 been to the forefront of people's minds when they have thought

 in this fashion and they have had two reasons for thinking as

 they have.
          Firstly, that India does not recognise the Crown and, 

 secondly, that on many things India has taken a view if not 

 contrary to ours, then certainly in supporting ours. When I say 

 ours I mean in broad the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand 

 and Canada as other members of the Commonwealth. Even some

                  -  2 -

 people of importance hold these views. It is quite wrong, 
 I believe, to say because of this the Commonwealth would be
 better without India.  I regret as much as anyone that India 
 does not recognise the Crown, but as a self-governing Nation 
 this is a choice that is her's to make.

              Regarding the other point - the fact that India 
 often puts forward a view different from ours on international 
yroblemms - I believe this is in a way more an argument for 
 keeping India within the Commonwealth than it is an argument 
 for her withdrawal from it.
              Indio has had a varied history and only recently 
 has she received full democratic self-government. Her people 
 are different from ours - in colour,tgia[a language and
 religion.   They belong to part of the great lane mass of 
 Asia, Millions of her people live in great poverty which 
 slowly and surely is being overcome.
              With this background it is not reasonable to 
 expect that India will think directly as we do on all 
 international problems of importance, and Ì. Macmillan,as 
 the British Prime Minister and leader of the country 
 which once governed India, has shown quite clearly that he 
 understands this. He has said that although we cannot always 
 agree with the neutral view that India puts forward, her
 view is one which at the very least we must respect. Thisrebus
 is true and the people who cannot see this are perhaps the 
 cif those who long:, for the days of the British Empire and 
 who cannot understand that the British Empire has changedAiato 
 something much greater - the British Commonwealth , . If we 
  are granted wise leadership in Commonwealth countries, the 
  Convonwealth can do exre than enything else to help solve

                                                   3


                         We have a free meeting of people who 
are completely different in background and religion but
who come in= together to discuss common problems freely
and in friendship. It may be,no united view emerges                                            Co...L' • -
from Commonwealth conferences2 but the foot that theljeader
          10-               :-411N11-21.dalbminiliftimme4110thM00101111t'                        '-'111111' **417.;-.0", ,
                                                 1.11111166 4:44,             come together to
hoar each others vient and learn to respect those view is 
important not only for the Coomonwealth. but few the world.

                              ow different it would be if the United 
Nations were able to conduct its conferences on a vieTad-wide 
basis in the sane fashion. But this mat be our hope and 
this is why the Commonwealth can and does set a great
example to the °thee? Netions of tte world.                                                 Mr. lacmillan 
has shown he realises this and as head of the first country 
 of the Commenwealt h that is ilaeortteit.

