<!--start metadata-->
Title: Proposed referendum
Description: press statement
Date: c1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT
MALCOLM FRASER

         PROPOSED REFERENDUM

     Both Houses of the Federal Parliament have now 
passed the Bills to provide for a referendum on two subjects. 
Two similar Bills were passed last year, but the referendum 
lapsed for a variety of reasons and it was decided to hold 
it when affairs would not be quite so busy, early in the life 
of this Parliament.
     The Bills provide amendments in two fields. I would 
like to deal with that concerning the Aboriginal race first.
REFERENDUM CONCERNING ABORIGINAL PEOPLE
     The referendum we now propose is slightly wider in 
scope than that which was suggested last year. We are
seeking to amend two provisions which affect the Aboriginal 
race. The first will deal with the reference which states 
that Aboriginal natives shall not be counted in reckoning the 
number of people in the state. There was a reason in 1900 
for this provision; there was great difficulty in counting 
the Aboriginal population at that time. This is no longer a 
problem and the provision should be removed.
     The second proposed amendment covers a section 
which reads: "The Parliament shall, subject to this 
constitution, have power to make laws for the peace, order 
and good Government of the country with respect to the people 
of any race, other than the Aboriginal race, in any state 
for whom it is deemed necessary to make laws." This is a 
widely held view (although the Government in fact believes it 
to be a false view) that the words "other than the Aboriginal 
race" discriminate against these people. If this is sc, it is 
certainly not in keeping with the spirit of our times and the 
Government proposes that it should be removed. One of the 
effects of removing these words from the constitution would

             2.

be to give the Commonwealth power to make special laws for 
the people of the Aboriginal race in any state that the 
Commonwealth Parliament thought necessary.
     The Prime Minister has said that if the proposal 
to remove these words is approved, the Government would want 
to hold discussions with the states to secure as wide an 
agreement as possible on measures designed to achieve the 
advancement of the Aboriginal people.
     I believe these two proposals will have universal 
approval. The third proposal, I believe and hope, will be
approved, but views about it may differ. 
SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
     This proposal is designed to break the connection 
between the House of Representatives and the Senate. At the 
present time, the Senate must be, as nearly as practicable, 
half the size of the Rouse of Representatives. This means 
that if the House of Representatives is to grow, the Senate 
must also grow. The duties and responsibilities of both 
Houses are quite different. The member of the House of 
Representatives, quite apart from national issues, has the 
particular personal responsibility to act for the people in 
his own electorate.
     Senators, clearly, are not as close to the people 
in this sense for they represent the whole state and they 
therefore do not get in as close contact with many of the 
personal and domestic issues which are of great importance 
to individuals.
     If the number of people in the state increases, 
the addition does not necessarily increase the responsibilities 
of the Senator, but if the numbers in any particular electorate 
increase, the responsibilities of the member of the House of

              3-

Representatives of that seat grow accordingly.
     We believe that we should have power to bring 
about a modest increase in the House of Representatives 
from time to time, without necessarily increasing the size 
of the Senate.
     At the present point of time, if we maintain the 
existing voting system for the Senate, it would be very 
difficult to increase the House of Representatives by less 
than 48. This is because of the particular voting system 
used for the Senate. In the system used, if the Senate 
were increased by less than 24 (7 Senators would be elected 
for each state at each election instead of 5) there would 
be a very greatly increased chance of a permanently dead- 
locked Senate. This would be most undesirable. It would 
also be most undesirable to increase the numbers in the 
Parliament by 48 in the House of Representatives and by 24 
in the Senate.
     In 1901, a member of the House of Representatives 
had about 50,000 people in his electorate. By 1947, the 
average had risen to over 100,000. The increase in the size 
of the House of Representatives from 74 to 121 in 1949, 
reduced the average population in each electorate to 67,000. 
It has since grown again to 94,000.
     The Bill also proposes that there should be written 
into the constitution a provision that there should be an 
average of no less than 85,000 people in each electorate.
     Thus, if the referendum to break the connection 
between the House of Representatives and the Senate is held, 
this provision providing for a minimum average of 85,000 
people in each electorate would enable the House of 
Representatives to be increased by a maximum of 13 or 14 
members by 1969.

            4

    I do not know of any other Parliament operating 
under a two House system that has the size of one House 
tied to the size of the other.
    In the United States, for example, their Senate 
has immense prestige and authority and it is a relatively 
small house. Their House of Representatives, the popular 
House which looks after the needs of the individuals of the 
country is, by our standards, a very large house, and of 
course it should be for the number of people in the United 
States.
    There is another reason why I believe that it is 
reasonable to increase the number of members in the House 
of Representatives from time to time. There is not the 
slightest doubt that the Federal Parliament and members of 
the House of Representatives now have to attend to a great 
many issues which were not involved in Federal Parliamentary 
duties before the last World War and it is probable in the 
nature of things that the number of matters in which the 
Federal Parliament will have an interest will tend to 
increase, and thus there will be more and more matters on 
which individual people will be approaching their own local 
member for some help and for some assistance from time to 
time. And if the member is to give the kind of assistance 
and the kind of help that he wants to give, he has got to 
be able to devote a good deal of attention to each particular 
case and this cannot be done if he is representing an 
exorbitant number of people.
    I believe the Government's proposals are reasonable 
and I hope that the one concerning the connection with the 
House of Representatives and the Senate, together with the 
proposal concerning the Aboriginal people will both have your 
support when the time for the referendum comes round later 
this year.

Questions on the proposed Referendum


    There are two parts to this Referendum, aren't 
there? But only one is likely to give cause to much concern.

    First, would you like to say something about the 
Referendum concerning the aborigines. What was the original 
reason for these provisions in the Constitution?

    Were they a mark of discrimination in the minds of 
the founders of the Constitution.






    Edell, if the second part of the Referendum is 
carried - that part which would make it possible for the 
Commonwealth to make special laws for the aboriginal race - 
do you envisage the Commonwealth getting into this field?



    Now, about the other section of the Referendum - 
if that is carried there will be more politicians, won't there? 
How many more and what is the reason for this?

    Is any one party likely to be advantaged by the 
Referendum?

    If the Referendum is carried and the House of 
Representatives is made larger from time to time but with 
the Senate remaining the same, will this reduce the importance 
of the Senate?

    If the Referendum breaking the link between the 
Representatives and the Senate is not carried, what do you 
think Parliament would do then in the way of redistribution? 
Would there still be a move to increase the number of seats 
with the present status quo remaining, or would you have a 
redistribution within present limits?

    Do you think electorates would be better represented 
if they were smaller?

    Some time ago the electoral law was changed which 
made it possible to take into account the area and size of 
country electorates in drawing boundaries. Is this likely 
to lead to fewer people in country electorates than in city 
electorates? Do you think this is reasonable?

                                Cfr-
      Facts on the Referendum

                                    / et~ ~


      In 1901 - average population in an electorate 50,000

      In 1947 -        V'         100,000

      In 1949 number of Representatives increased from 74 to 121, 
           reducing average population in electorates to 67,000.

      Present average is 94,000.


      Minimum average if Referendum carried will be 85,000.


      Maximum increase in House of Reps by 1969 if Referendum carried 
           will be 13 or 14.



           At,erre_Pra  •
           G©ns€rue~-
      1214-gl ±tuts• /~$,' w are /. 'y d
      lei    = ;- nate

           It is not compulsory for aboriginals to enrol for 
      voting, but if they do they are subject to the normal fine 
      if they do not vote.

           In the National Service Act and the Social Services 
      Act there are provisions giving aboriginals special benefits.

           In 1964 the Territories took action to remove all 
      truly discriminatory provisions in their jurisdiction and they 
      have now brought all Territories provisions into line with 
      the State provisions.





rto (

