<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence
Description: Electorate talks
Date: 2/05/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       EMBARGO: 5.00pm


                -1 ,AUSTR~



           PRIME MINISTER


    FOR MEDIA          SUNDAY, 2 MAY 1982



               ELECTORATE TALK


    Last Thursday, the Minister for Defence, Mr Killen, made a
    major statement in the Parliament. It came on the eve of events 
    to mark the forthieth anniversary of one of Australia's most 
Mcritical moments in history, the Battle of the Coral Sea.
    Australia's circumstances today are very different from those 
    we faced in early May 1942, but the memory of those frightening 
    days and the substance of last week's defence statement point to 
    two things. First, that there is a continuing need for a strong 
    defence force, tailored to meet the threats and challenges of the 
    times; and second, that the Government has been meeting its 
    commitment to building that strong defence force.

    Defence requires adequate funding and appropriate manpower and 
    equipment. The Government's defence spending has been increasing 
    substantially in recent years, bringing,,with it significant real 
    improvements in Australia's defence capability. Indeed, defence 
    outlays in 1981/82 have increased by 19.1% over 1980/81, well 
    above the general price increases of between 10 and 11 per cent, 
    and although the Budget for 1982/83 has not yet been competed, 
    there will be a further substantial increase in the defence 
    vote next year, adding further to our real defence capacity.

 •  In relation to manpower, since service pay and allowances were 
    increased late last year, there are already early indications 
    that more service personnel are staying with the forces. There 
    is sometimes the feeling that increases in service pay are not 
    really a part of an increased defence effort, but this is quite 
    wrong.

    Apart from the common justice of adequately paying- those who are 
    charged with the defence of Australia, it is important to attract 
    appropriate people, to train and educate them to the high levels 
    demanded today and then to retain them in the forces. Paying 
    to attract, train and retain service personnel is an integral 
    part of Australia's defence effort.

    In relation to equipment, the Government has made two major
    changes to its on-going defence programme. We will acquire a new 
    aircraft carrier and ten new Orion aircraft earlier than planned. 
    They were in the programme but they have both been brought forward.

   The decision to replace HMAS Melbourne with the new British 
   carrier, HMS Invincible, is well known. We wanted a new
   carrier, the Invincible became availabe, and it was a bargain 
   price. We had to take advantage of the offer and make an early 
   commitment or pay a lot more in the future for another aircraft 
   carrier.

   Australia will also take early delivery of ten new P3C"Orïon 
   aircraft. In doing to so we have gained an advantage from getting 
   into the current production run in the United States. They will 
   replace the existing squadron of P3B aircraft and their purchase 
   will increase the nubmer of P3C's Australia has available to a 
   total of twenty. These are modern long-range maritime patrol 
   aircraft, they are the best in the world.

   The defence programme has to be flexible, we must be able to 
   respond to changed circumstances. The pay increases and the 
•  early acquisition of the aircraft carrier and the Orions have 
   led to a rescheduling of some other items of the programme 
   but without detriment to our overall defence capacities.

   We will continue to maintain and develop all of our defence 
   capabilities. This financial year, we will spend more than 
   four billion dollars on the nation's defence and in the last 
   18 months, we have more than doubled our commitment to future 
   defence purchases to almost six billion dollars.

   We have now, in the words of the recently retired Chief of Defence 
   Force Staff, the best-equipped and best trained force we have ever 
   had in peacetime, and the programme we have developed for the 
   future will continue to build it up.

   As well as the new aircraft carrier and the 1Q_ extra P3C Orions, 
   we have decided to buy 75 highly sophisticated F/A-18 fighter 
   aircraft. Two new frigates have entered service and a further 
   2 will enter service over the next couple of years. Our
   existing destroyers are being modernised and our defence
   industries are being upgraded to support and maintain the complex 
   equipment entering service in this decade.

   Australia's defences are strong and relevant to today. The 
   Government is fulfilling its fundamental responsibility to keep 
   this nation secure.




                ---000---

