<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, bugging of Malaysian delegation
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 26/03/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                      3HA Sunday 26th March 1972 
                                      3YB Thursday 30th March 1972
      BROADCAST:                      3LK Tuesday 28th March 1972

      My portfolio of Education and Science gives me responsibility 
      for The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
      Organisation, an aea of Government-sponsored activity which 
      never ceases to fascinate and inform me.

      Its contribution to Australia's primary industries over the 
      years through the results of its extensive and varied research 
      have impressed me greatly as a farmer and a Minister and Member
•     of Parliament.

      Let me mention one of their recent activities and findings. 
      C.S.I.R.O. plant industry specialists have conducted experiments 
      and field trials which show that sheep do better when run with 
      cattle than when they are run by themselves.

      The experiments measured production obtained from running 
      sheep and cattle separately and together on the same pasture.
•     The results pointed to the conclusion that the two animals 
      grazed together could be more productive than either on its own.

      Both the liveweight gains of sheep and the weight of shorn-
      fleece proved greater. More ewes became pregnant and the 
      average weight of lambs at weaning was higher.

      While higher stocking rates reduced the performance of sheep 
      grazed by themselves, it scarcely affected the performance of 
      those running with cattle.

                2.

   Some cattle at high stocking rates on improved pasture lost 
   weight in winter, but made compensatory gains in Spring, 
   increasing in weight faster than better fed cattle on lower 
   stocking rates. It appears that the fact that sheep prefer short 
   green feed and cattle longer grasses is the main reason why they 
   can be complimentary feeders.

   The C.S.I.R.O. experiment showed that sheep and cattle together 
   made better use of the pasture than either of them separately. 
   The experiment also illustrated that the productivity of sheep 
   in mixed grazing was virtually the same at all stocking rates.

   The results show that at optimum stocking rates, sheep and cattle 
   together can be more profitable than either on their own when 
   prices for wool and beef are not too disparate.

   At a Canberra field experiment, the optimum stocking rate was 
   about 50 steers or 450 ewes per 100 acres for cattle or sheep
•  by themselves, or 30 steers plus 250 ewes for the mixed system.

   Another important conclusion from the research is that profit 
   from mixed grazing appeared to exceed the total profit from 
   the same number of sheep and cattle run separately. However, 
   work on the economics of mixed grazing is being continued.

   These experiments are of particular interest and significance 
   at the present time when there has been a great swing from sheep 
   to cattle. How relevant they are to our own part of the world 
   is something we would very often have to judge for ourselves.

                  3.

   I now turn to a matter which was aired last week in the Federal 
   Parliament and which concerns me greatly as an Australian and
   as a Member of the Government. At the centre was Mr. Morrison, 
   former Australian diplomat and now a potential foreign Minister 
   if the A.L.P. became the Government. Mr. Morrison alleged that 
   the Australian Government had "bugged" with a hidden microphone 
   the Malaysian delegation's hotel rooms during a five-power
   defence conference in Canberra three years ago.

   This claim from Mr. Morrison came only a few days after he had 
   returned from a visit to South-East Asia during which he had told 
   newsmen in Singapore that he did not believe Singapore or Malaysia 
   would be very worried if Australia withdrew its troops from the 
   five-power defence force in the territory. The A.L.P. is committed 
   to withdrawing Australian forces from the five-power defence 
   arrangement which involves Malaysia, Singapore, Britain, N.Z. and 
   Australia.

   The withdrawal policies of the A.L.P. are well known and widely
•  rejected by both the Government and the community. Statements 
   such as those of Mr. Morrison's in Singapore embarrass and
   concern our allies who regard Australia's firm commitment, backed 
   by forces in the region, as the lynch pin of the region's defence 
   arrangement.

   But the bugging charge shows the complete irresponsibility of 
   the opposition in the field of foreign relations and the disregard 
   of Mr. Morrison for the effect of sensational, completely unfounded 
   allegations on the friendship that has been carefully developed 
   between Malaysia and Australia.

                   4.

     The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bowen, who was 
     Attorney—General three years ago, has denied that the bugging 
     occurred. The Malaysian High Commissioner, Dato Stephens, 
     has said he is satisfied there is nothing in it. And the 
     counsellor at the High Commission, Mr, Walter Ayathury, has 
     said the whole thing began with a joking remark at the time.

     To seal the issue, the Malaysian High Commission issued an 
     official statement denying categorically the bugging 
     allegations. But, unbelievably, Mr. Morrison persisted with 
•    his charges based on two paragraphs in a book published two 
     years ago dealing with an allegation that a Malaysian security 
     man had found a listening device hidden in the air—conditioning 
     equipment in one of the hotel rooms.

     If one couples these outbursts with the low priority the 
     A.L.P. gives to defence generally, then the international
     outlook for Australia under a Labor Government is indeed bleak.


•

