<!--start metadata-->
Title: Trade unions
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 29/06/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


            TpAps 
      Byt kalcolm Fraser, Uember for Wunnon.

     The history of Trade Unions goes back well over 100 years 
and I thought it may be interesting to have a look at it in general 
terms to see how the Trade Unions have grown and how they huve fought 
for their members and achieved worthwhile and lasting benefits for thin.
     In the beginning in the early 18008, tÌe British Government
in Englanu tried to prevent the formation of what today would be celled 
Trade Unions. M!,ny of the activities which Unions toy employ as
normal bargaining were in those tutu times banned. Indeed there were 
periods in which the law prevented more than two or three people meeting 
together in any public place. This of course prevented factory workers 
from being able to plan courses of action which would lead to an improve- 
ment in their pay or in their working conditions.
     By the middle of the nineteenth century, this general dislike
of Trade Unions had largely disappeared and trade associations of one 
kind or another were becoming accepted by ttie general public. Up to 
1900 Trade Union lenders of the day religiously believed that the 
union should remain outside politics, that they should try to press 
for their requirements by actions that were non-political in nabs's. 
This policy i_roved to bring slow results for the unionists and therefore 
about 1900 it was changed and in tee early 1900s.we found Labor LPs. 
in the British karliament for the first time.
     The same movement has taken place in Australia and Trade
Union organisations seek to benefit the people whom they sought to 
represent through direct political action. In the background of 
political labour policy (perhaps more taan in trade unionists policy) 
has been the nationulisation or socialisation of many industries. 
HoweveL, it would be ciarect to say that the actions that have brought 
the most lasting benefits to unionists would be those which have led 
to shorter working hours, higher wages and better waking conditions. 
After all, for the man working in the factory the important things are 
 is conditions of work, his hours of work and his wages.

             After the great period ornnationelisation by the British 
Government of 1945 the workers in the industries were often sadly 
 disappointed, They thought that with nationalisation that they wdre 
 going to have control oa` their industry, but in effect nationalisation 
 meant that their boss, so called, was bigger and more untouchable 
 and more remote than ever, and this disappointment has been shown in 
 the figures of industrial unrest which are much greater in racationalised 
 industries than they are in privately owned industries.
             With the growth of Trade Unions it was only natural that acme 
 organisation or machinery should be established whereby the Unions 
 and the employers can both put their cases so that an impartial 
 judgement may be cede on wages, hours of work or on working coedit 0ns. 
 Australia has evolved a Federal Arbitration Court, an industrial court 
 to fulfil this purpose for people working under Federal awards andthe
 States have their own tribunals.
              The institution of these tribunals or arbitration courts 
 has on the whole been a goad thing for Australia because it has meant 
 that arguments over wages have very 1urgely been outside the direct 
 politico l field in the h> >a of an lnde sndent authority.
              In Austraalia, a greater number of man belong; to Unions 
  than ever before and this places great responsibility on Union leaders 
  to see that they use their power wisely and with good sense. I believe 
  it is true to say that, with perhaps notable exceptions such as the 
  leadership of the Waterside Workers or of the coal Diners in the late 
  1940s, Union leaders have used their power with this sense of res-
  ponsibility.
              Low I want to rake one final sisprri point. When a manu- 
  facturer makes an article for sale, he puts as high a .price on it as he 
  thinks he can get for the number he can turn out. In fixing this 
  price he of course :oust take into account his competition from other
  firms.        . is o in selling their primary produce, fa rmers and primary
  producers sell few the highest price that they can possibly get and 
  this is perfectly natural and reasonable. It is the conduct that we 
  expect these people to follow, but the unionist in general has not got 
  any wool to sell and has not any manufactured articles to sell. Ho has

  only one thing for sale - his owi labour and his own skill.

                  reasonable and I believe natural                         efore to expec
       o sell these things for the highest possible price. It is
his Union that carries on this fight for its individual members 
and it is f orr this reason that the Federal " rbitration (:•ourt in
large measure in determining .gage rates, uses for its stand« rd
the highest wage that the industry can bear sill at trio sand tira
remain competitive and profitable. io one benefits if an industry
goes bankrupt.The well being of the wage earner an the employer
      only be achieved if each realises that they are dependent
on each other.              4u,etr : liana should be ploasec. that both groups
have over the lest few years coma to have a better understanding
and        and for this mutual dependence.




 26/6/l958.

