<!--start metadata-->
Title: Western Australia
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 11/05/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     ~                               /---k A _  (//s
 55—MINUTI, TALK — 11/5/58.
                                               /7
                    WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
          A short while ago, the Government passed a special 
 grant of 4 million pounds to assist Western Australia in developing 
 her northern areas. We in Victoria might very well ask if the 
 Commonwealth is prepared to make a special grant to assist Western 
 Australia in the Kimberleys, why should not the Commonwealth make 
 a special grant for some special purpose in Victoria. There is a 
 clear answer to this suggestion and at the basis of the answer is 
 the fact that we are not six independent States each going our own 
 way, each carrying out our own development without regard to the 
 rest of Australia. We are rather one nation and one people with a 
xbboc common objective — to develop Australia as well and as rapidly 
 as we can.
          There are many reasons why the Kimberleys in Western 
 Australia or, perhaps, areas in Queensland should come under a 
 special category so far as Commonwealth grants are concerned and 
 this is bound up with the relative financial power between the 
 different States.
          Briefly, I would like to contrast this financial power 
 taking, say, Vktoria and Western Australia as examples. In the 
 first place, Victoria, as Victorians are the richest of all 
 Australians. Their average income is much higher than the average 
 income of people from any other State. Secondly, although a high 
 population in a small area carries its own burdens and difficulties, 
 it is quite plain that there are more people to share these burdens 
 and that there are greater resources with which to meet the diffi- 
 culties that arise. And there is another point which is important. 
 Industrial development in Australia is concentrated very largely 
 in the three South Eastern States — New South Wales, Victoria and 
 South Australia and by far the greatest development has taken place 
 in the State of Victoria.

                                ' 2-

               Now, there are many Australia—wide companies that 
    have their headquarters in Melbourne, If you like you can take
    Fords. They are spending many millions of pounds in building a 
    new factory at Rl1roadmeadows to supplement their existing works at 
    Geelong. Aim; Lhe income from Fords in Commonwealth returns counts 
    as Victorian income because the Company is registered in Victoria 
    and its main works are in Victoria but quite clearly only a small 
    proportion of that income is earned in Victoria. Fords are sold 
    throughout Australia and probably only one in five or perhaps 
    slightly more than one in five is sold in Victoria. The others are 
    sold in New South Wales, Queensland, Western Australia or the 
    Northern Territory or anywhere else throughout the Commonwealth. 
    A Victorian company is thus earning income from the rest of the 
    Commonwealth. If this applies once it applies many, many times.
               Victoria and New South Wales are practically the only 
    States that benefit in any significant way from this kind of happen- 
    ing because they are the States with the most industrialisation 
    and most Australian factories and businesses have their headquarters 
    in one of these two States.
               It is possible to demonstrate this sort of thing in
    another way. For every ton of goods that Eastern Australia buys
    from Western Australia, Western Australia buys 7 tons of goods from
    the factories in the East. Therefore in this way we see there is
    a constant drawing off of purchasing po7oer from the West to the East
~Q~~by viv5ue of~ t ew a~ss~t-s' su rer or resources in very b~1.e~tauf
` T            All this goes to show why the Kimberleys of Western 
    Australia qualify for a special developmental grant from the
    Commonwealth when Victoria would not. We, as Victorians, may regret 
    this, especially since this grant will be filled very largely with
    taxation monies that are collected from Victoria or New South Wales, 
    because it is common knowledge that Victoria does nbt get back 
    from the Commonwealth all the money that she pays to the Commonwealth 
    in taxation. As Victorians we may regret this but as Australians 
    it is inevitable and we should not regret it if we wish to remain 
    the most significant member in the Commonwealth, No new principle
    is recognised in this. For many years, the better off, in paying

                        -3—
their income tax, have put more into the general pool for the 
benefit of the whole nation than have those on small incomes. They 
not only pay more but they pay at a higher rate and in the same way 
the States that are better off, like Victoria and New South "Wales, 
put more into the general Commonwealth pool for the advancement 
of the whole of Australia than do the poorer States like Western 
Australia and Queensland. Surely, as Australians we should not object 
to this. If we look at Australia as a whole we must realise that 
balanced development throughout the whole of the Commonwealth is the 
only thing that can make Australia secure for the future. If we have 
a small, highly industrialised Victoria and New South ':'Vales with a 
tremendous concentrated population, and if we leave other areas of 
Australia under—developed and under—populated, then we are not justify- 
ing our possession of these lands, *44491ite clearly, if we do not 
justify to the eyes of the world our possession of this country, then 
it would be very easy for people in the more over—crowded countries 
of Asia to turn their eyes south to the Australian Continent.
          For several years, a balanced development throughout 
Australia has been the Commonwealth's policy and although its own 
jurisdiction in the north ends officially outside the boundaries of 
the Northern Territory, quite a lot has been done in other areas to 
help Omploal development in one field or another. For several years 
now, a research station has been examining the agricultural and 
pastoral possibilities of certain areas in the Kimberleys and I believe 
it certain that in the lifetime of most people now living we shall 
see extensive development in this particular area. -'ith suitable 
engineering works water would be no problem. The rainfall is good
and fairly reliable, the chief difficulty at present Ue that it 
falls swiftly at one period of the year, runs out to sea and is 
wasted. If it were damned -- and the geography of the country 
makes large scale dams possible in this area -- if it were dammed 
this water could be stored for use throughout the year for
agriculture and for irrigation.
          This grant of 22 million pounds which the Commonwealth 
recently approved and passed for -esters Australia may seem a small 
beginning but nevertheless it is significant. It shows that we

           -4-



4
'are beginning to look more and more to our northern areas, to

develop them as best we can to the limit of our capacity and 

resources, and if the West Australian Government uses this money 

wisely, it could well lead to further development in the north—west 

of the Kirnberleys which will open up a new period of development 

and expansion in that region.


































           „of

