<!--start metadata-->
Title: ANZAC Day
Description: press statement
Date: 3/05/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


14ALCOliki FRAM

 PUSZ ZTAT

                      ANZAC DY

              Last weekend Anzac Day celebrations were held throu— 

 out Austraia. People do not always realise that a generation of young 

men and women have grown up who were only children when the war ended.

For instance I was only 15 when the Japanswar in the Pacific was

finoliy concluded.

              A4ac Day eerves not only to remind the older on
of Australians of the sacrifice that was made by nnny people, but ale° 

it serves to teach the younger generation of some of the great 

traditions which have been built up in our few short years of 

Australian history.

               Younger people like myself  ver be able to

repay the debt which we owe to these who aver ved in two World wars. 

Boon those who fought and who returned to Aostrclia unharmed cannot 

repay the debt they owe to those who did not return. It is well 

that we ask ourselves, and I am speaking again especially to the 

younger generation, why Australians fought in two ;iorld wars, because 
unless we can understand the reasons for their sacrifice we can never 

play our part in preserving Australia as they would have liked to see 

it. The ideals for which men fought and for which many men died can 

best be described in general terms which, however, mean so mean to 

us all. They fought for freedom, for liberty, for the right to lead 

their own lives unhindered. They fought for the right to Choose 

their own Government or to change their Government. They fought

also for the rule of law which alone can give Men and woman freedom 
   fear
fro/and peace inside their own country, but most important of all

Australian have fought in two world wars in the belief and in the 

supreme hope that this would be the last of ouch conflicts. They 

fought and believed that they were fighting for a lasting and 

enduring peace. If there was a hope in their heart I think it 

may have been — I hope my eon will not have to go through this 

in twenty or thirty years time'.

       This, perhaps, gives U4 seine idea of the way in which the 

younger generation of Australians can do something to pay the debt

which we owe.If we can all think of some WA t in which we can

                        2
mike a contribution to the progress or to the happiness of this 
country, then we are do in something for the general good of Austrelia, 
6e should not live entirely selfish lives, thinking purely of what 
is best for oursaves.
             I would like to say a short word about the R.S.L. 
itself. This organization has won the respect of everyone in the 
communityand of all the Governments for two reasons. Firstly, all 
preposals that it pute to the Government are done only after a great 
deal of thought and discussion. By the time they reach the Govern- 
ment there ie much sound commoneense in them and, coneequently, I would 
eay without fear of contradiction thet more weight is given to 
:ropoeitions c4ming from the 3.L. than from eny other group and, 
eecondly, the R.S.b. is great because it refused to be drawn into 
party politic, and because it has been comAstely nonresecterian; 
it will remain great while it maintains these two principles.
             We all realise that the is a great force 
for good inthe community. However, we must realise that unless 
there is another war the R.S.L. cannot exist forever. The present 
memberehip if the 37„0.L. probably cannot continuo to make thic 
organization effective much beyond another 40 to !X) years, and 
unless in the meantime there hoe been another war end there has been 
another generation of returned men coming back from overseas there 
will be no new generation to keep this great ortanization in being.
e must hope that we are succeseful in maintaining the peace so that 
there will never be another najor war or another war of eny kind. If 
we are successful in this in the uietant future the R..1". will 
pass from existence. If this dose happen then we can say we have 
won the peace and that our debt to those who fought and who died 
has been fully repaid.

