<!--start metadata-->
Title: Free medicine
Description: press statement
Date: 13/09/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        STATALENT                                        September 13th,1959
• LAu.coLX rxASa

                               FRIT. kì::;17I~IN~
                   The recent budget has made changes in the Government's 
  pharmaceutical benefits scheme. In the first instance, people who have 
  had benefits) under this scheme in the past may feel they are going to be 
  worse off, but I don't really think that is so. I would like to give a 
  brief history of the scheme and tell why the Government thought it 
  necessary to bring in the present changes.
                    There were three main reasons for introducing the 
  scheme. In the first place, the Government wished to lift the burden 
  of costly drugs from the patient so far as serious illness was concerned. 
  Secondly, it wished to prevent serious diseases, such as diphtheria and 
  whooping cough and, thirdly, by the use of these drugs it hoped to 
 reduce hospitalization and the high costs that go with it.
                    In the early years the scheme was fairly stable as 
 far as costae were concerned, but the last few years have seen an 
 extremely rapid advance in the development of new drugs. These have, 
 from time to time, been added to the list of free drugs - generally 
 their cost of prescription is extremely high. In recent times the 
 number of prescriptions and the cost of the prescription has increased 
 very greatly. In 1950-31 6i million prescriptions were written under
 the scheme at a cost of just over €7 million.       In 1958/59 13i million 
 prescriptions were written at a cost of Fl8i million. These costs 
 are for the general pharmaceutical scheme and do not include the cost 
 of pensioner scheme or repatriation. In 19501 the number of 
prescriptions written under the scheme were 15A of all prescriptions 
written, now 43) of all prescriptions are written under the scheme. 
In 1950/51 again the Government paid 20,j of the cost of all prescriptions 
written. These figures demonstrate the very marked and steep rise 
in the cost of the pharmaceutical benefits scheme.
                   There are three main reasons why the Government is 
bearing an increased share of the cost of medical prescriptions. 
Firstly, new drugs on the free list have been prescribed by doctors 
instead of other drugs which are not on the free list. Secondly, because 
the free list has been expanded with new drugs most diseases, including

                2

 minor ailments, can be treated from the free list. There is, 
 therefore, economic pressure on the doctor to fit these prescriptions 
 to the pharmaceutical benefits list. Thirdly, in the early years 
 of the usage of a new drug there is often a natural reticence on 
 the part of the medical practitioner in using this drug because of 
 its cost and because of lack of experience in its use; these fears 
 are entirely removed when the Government puts a new drug on its 
 free list.
       Certain conclusions can be drawn if the present 
 position were allowed to remain unaltered. Prescriptions would be 
 increasingly channeled to the free list, especially as new drugs 
 become available. It would be reasonable to assume that if
 present trends continue the Government's obligation under the 
 scheme would increase from 50% to 70% or 80 of all prescriptions
written, and most important the overall cost to the cm:unity for 
prescriptions would be more expansive than it need, be. The reason 
for that is plain, many cheap pharmaceuticals which could be 
adequately used for minor ailments are now not used because they 
are not on the free list. Doctors tend to use the expensive 
pharmaceuticals which do happen to be on the free list, even thou& 
for some things the expensive drug may be no better than the
cheaper one.
        If these trend are not arrested they could lead to 
the taxpayer being called upon to meet a rapidly increasing drug 
bill which could well get to a figure of £30 million or more in a 
very short time.
        The Government has done two things. The scheme is 
going to be widened to include nearly every drug and every 
prescription which the doctors can prescribe, therefore there will 
be no pressure on the doctors to prescribe an expensive drug when 
a cheap one would do equally well.
        secondly, instead of patients getting some 
prescriptions for nothing and the patient having to pay the full 
price for others the patient will, in future, pay a small proportion
of emdh prescription which the Government fixed at 5/...

                                 3
    If you consider that this fee of 5/- is too high it should be borne 
in mind that the average cost of all prescriptons under the general 
pharmaceutical scheme is much higher, for instance the July figures 
in Victoria the average for each prescription was 26/-.
     The Government proposes that the changes it has brought in for 
greatly widening the list of free drugs to include almost all drugs 
available will prevent this waste. A small charge is being made for 
each prescription which will not lower the cost of this scheme so fer
as the Federal budget is concerned. Indeed, the total cost of 
the scheme to the Commonwealth on its new basis will be slightly 
more than before, but all drugs will be covered and the patient 
instead of getting some for free and some for the full cost will be 
paying a small charge for every prescription.
      I believe the innovations are sound.

