<!--start metadata-->
Title: British troops arrive in North Queensland
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 18/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                 Directorate of Public Relations,~fy/~~ 
                                 Army Headquarters,
                                 Russell Offices,
                                 CANBERRA. A.C.T

 FOR PRESS                        NO. 5023

                B.ITISH TROOPS ARRIVE IN NORTH QUEENSLAND 

         The British landing ship logistic (LSL) Sir Lancelot, arrived at 
 Port Alma, near Rockhampton, at the weekend after a 10-day trip from 
 Singapore, carrying 400 troops of the King's Shropshire Light Infantry.
        The troops were bound for the Australian Army's Shoalwater Bay 
 Training Area, about 60 miles north of Rockhampton to take part in Exercise
 "Piping Shrike" with the South Australian based 3rd Battalion, The Royal 
 Australian Regiment.
        About 200 troops from the KSLI had already arrived in Australia to 
 take part in the exercise, and the latest arrivals bring the British force on 
 the exercise to more than 600. Also aboard Sir Lancelot were 50 vehicles,
 three Sioux helicopters and tons of military supplies - all for use at 
 "Piping Shrike".
        Among the troops were 35 bandsmen and 25 buglers of the KSLI Band,
 who will perform at the Royal Melbourne Show with bands of the Australian 
 Regular Army.
        Sir Lancelot, operated by the Merchant Navy under contract from the
 British Ministry of Defence, is the first of about six similar vessels to 
 serve with the British Army.
        With a displacement of more than 5,600 tons, the 421-foot vfsael has 
 stern door and bow ramp loading facilities to allow direct roll-on roll-off 
 loading and unloading directly onto the shore.
        This technique was not used at Port Alma - the ship unloaded its 
 entire cargo at the wharfside, using its own 20-ton cranes. Two convoys then 
moved from Port Alma to the exercise area, about 100 miles away.
        The first convoy was of 10 buses and seven 3-ton vehicles carrying 
the British troops.
        This was followed by a convoy of 30 vehicles and 20 trailers 
unloaded from the ship.
        Alter unloading the troops, vehicles and other stores, the three 
helicopters, which were carried as deck cargo, were flown directly from the 
ship to Manifold, base for the exercise, in the Shoalwater Bay Pr.a at the 
Southern end of the rugged Clinton Peninsula.



18 September, 1967                  Lists: A
                                    Further information:
                             CANBERRA: Major Ross-Smith
                                      (65-4061) (86-1138)
                         OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS
EDITORS/BUREAU CHIEFS

This story could be a duplicate for your office as it was released from the 
Exercise Headquarters last night.

