<!--start metadata-->
Title: Dairy industry stabilisation
Description: press statement
Date: 21/04/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


      Despatched to Radio Speech List - D.J.O. - 20/'+

PRESS RELEASE
MALCOLM FRASER 21 APRIL, 1967

      DAIRY INDUSTRY STABILISATION
    On the 5 April the Minister for Primary 
Industry introduced new Legislation for a further 
five year's stabilisation plan for the dairy industry.

    In many respects the plan will be the same 
as previous ones which of course have been developed 
and refined over a period of time. It will involve 
a production bounty for the benefit of the Industry.

    The Minister pointed out that this is regarded 
as a sound investment in a vital area of primary 
production. The purpose of the bounty is to maintain 
at reasonable levels the cash returns received by 
dairy farmers who supply milk and cream for manufacturing 
purposes. The bounty also makes it possible for the 
price to be kept much lower than it might otherwise be.
    The present plan expires at the end of June this 
year and the new one will be ready to take its place.
    A bounty of 27,000,000 dollars will be made 
available on butter and cheese for each year of the 
five year plan. This bounty will be payable on this 
basis until June, 1972. An additional bounty will be 
paid on the export of processed milk products in each 
year of the new plan. This bounty was introduced a few 
years ago and has quite considerably increased the export 
of dry milk products which at the time were finding it 
difficult to compete in world markets.
                        /2

                    -2-

         The principle of underwriting equalisation 
values of butter and cheese at levels which would enable 
the Dairy Produce Equalisation Committee to make a reason- 
able first payment through the factories is also being 
maintained.

         The level at which interim payments will be 
underwritten will be decided each year in the light of 
production and overseas market knowledge but for 1967/68 
the underwritten value will be 34 cents per pound which is 
roughly one cent more than that which has existed since the 
beginning of the scheme in 1958.

         In these aspects the new stabilisation plan is 
the same as much of the old. In its submission to the 
Government the Industry did make recommendations concerning 
assistance that may be provided to aid marginal producers 
build up their properties so that they become profitable 
working units or in some cases leave the industry.
         The New South Wales, 'lieensland and Western 
Australian States have I think, been particularly keen to 
achieve something on these lines, because in general terms 
the dairy industry in these States is not so profitable as
it is in Victoria. But even in this State there will be 
some farms, because of size or location that may benefit 
from these new measures.

         The Government believes that the Development Bank 
together with the Term Loan Funds and the Farm Development 
Loan Fund has done a good deal to supplement previously 
existing sources of rural finance. The Minister said that

                    -3-

he thought that most economically sound dairy farmers 
would be able to get finance for properly based plans 
to increase farm efficiency and farm profitability. He 
went on to point out that there is a group of marginal 
dairy farmers whose farms fall into a different category. 
These are the farms, which for a number of reasons, are 
not able, under normal circumstances, to become payable 
propositions with to-day's production methods and to-day's 
markets. Unless some special provision is introduced, 
people on such farms are not able to share tie rising 
living standards in Autralia. The Minister thought that 
help might enable some of them, if they wished to leave the 
industry to take up some other occupation. For others he 
suggested that it may be in the form of some special 
assistance for the reconstruction of farms so that they 
can be operated on a payable basis, either in dairying or 
in some other line of rural production.
        In principle the Government has agreed that assist- 
ance of this kind should be made available to the marginal 
dairy farmer, but the most effective ways of providing help 
have yet to be worked out. This would involve discussions 
with the industry and with State-Governments. The Commonwealth 
will make sure that there are no undue delays of getting this 
kind of assistance under way.
        Another form of special assistance may well be made 
available. Where it can be demonstrated that funds are not 
available from normal financial resources, the Government will 
be prepared to examine applications by the Australian Dairy 
Produce Board for a Commonwealth loan or guarantee, the 
purpose of which would be to help factories diversify their/4

•    •                                     -4-

                production away from butter on the one hand or to help 
                the Dairy Produce Board expand its overseas operations. 
                These last two matters which I have mentioned are both 
                innovations in the new Plan and I believe they represent 
                quite a significant advance.
                          The Minister went on to say something about 
                margarine and the arguments that have been coming forward 
                over a number of years.

                          It is the State's prerogative to establish and 
                maintain the quota system of production and recently the 
                Agricultural Council, on which all the States are represented, 
                unanimously agreed that the present quota system should be 
                maintained. The margarine interests have tried to suggest 
                that the Australian vegetable oilseed industry will be 
                greatly jeopardised by this decision. The facts do mot 
                support this view.
                          There is a market in Australia for about 51,500 
                tons of edible type vegetable oils, even if table margarine
                production is fixed to the quotas.   The best estimates that
                we can get indicate that Australian grown oilseed crops will 
                produce 16,850 tons while a further 18,000 tons of coconut 
                oil is imported from Papua, New Guinea. Thus Australian 
                and New Guinea production of 'oilseeds is a. little under 
                35,000 tons. Since there is a market of over 51,000 tons 
                for this type of oil it is quite clear that even without 
                an increase in margarine production there is adequate 
                opportunity for Australian and New Guinea oilseed producers 
                to sell everything that they can produce.
                          At the present time imports are used t-) make up 
                the difference between local consumption and local production.

                                                                      /5

s    v•
                                             -5-

                                Some people often forget the tremendous investment 
                    and the great number of people that are involved in the Dairy 
                    Industry. Current production is worth about $415 million 
                    per year. Over $1400 million is invested in the industry 
                    which supports 600,000 people. One hundred thousand of 
                    these are directly employed in the Industry. In addition 
                    it is an industry which has done more for decentralisation 
                    in Australia than any other and at the momentit is earning 
                    over $100 million per year of export credits.
                                The announcement of the new plan confirms the 
                    Government's determination to help and to protect the 
                    Industry.

