<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry
Description: radio talks
Date: 2/06/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


DRAFT RADIO SPEECH
      Malcolm Fraser         2 June 1967
          I was asked some time ago to attend a meeting with 
      Sir William Gunn to discuss wool problems in Hamilton. The 
      person who asked me to attend this meeting never once set a firzp 
      date but the 21st June was finally decided upon between Sir 
      William Gunn and myself. In view of all this, I was somewhat 
      surprisedwhen, in the middle of organising the meeting, the 
      person who asked me to attend it charged me publicly with 
      ignoring the wool industry. I utterly reject the charge.
          It was largely because long term problems could be 
      foreseen that I was determined that wool sales should be 
      established at Portland. It was for this reason that I led the 
      grower deputation which prepared the general case and I also 
      led the deputation which sought the economic inquiry. I gave 
      the first evidence to the inquiry on behalf of growers. It is 
      now history that wool sales were successfully established in 
      1963/64 when just under 30,000 bales were sold by one broker. 
      This year 150,000 bales will be sold by five brokers and next 
      year it is estimated that over 200,000 bales will be sold by 
      six wool brokers. These figures illustrate quite dramatically 
      the effect that this move alone has had, and is still having, 
      on the wool producers of the area. The establishment of these 
      sales is also leading to the construction of a super-phosphate 
      works with a consequent greater reduction in costs to local 
      producers.
          It was also said that I have never once taken time out 
      to seek the views of the Victorian Wheat and Wool Growers' 
      Association. This is just not true. On several occasions I 
      have sptken at length with deputations led by the very man who 
      made the charges. I have always asked him and other members 
      of the Association to put their views to me whenever they felt 
      they had something to say. This has applied, in particular, to 
      Association members of the Australian Wool Industry Conference. 
      When matters arise in the Federal .phere which concern primary 
      prmaxxxxx*mdmimaxximxWaxmmmxIdommI industries i also take steps
                                ./2

4                                               2

                to inform all primary producers' unions in Wannon about them. 
                I regard this as part of my job as Federal Member for Wannon, 
                just as I regard it as part of my job to keep the electorate 
                generally informed on matters of national interest, especially 
                those relating to my own Ministerial function, which unfortun- 
                ately involves men under my general administration in participa- 
                tion in the Vietnam war. In the charges made against me, the 
                slighting and unnecessary comment about Vietnam and the problems 
                of a developing New Guinea do little credit to the man concerned.
                          There is just as little justification in the attack 
                that was made at the same time on the Federal Government for 
                ignoring the wool industry. The present Federal Government has 
                done more than any other in history to support that industry, 
                in particular the small wool grower. In its early years special 
                depreciation allowances were introduced to encourage mechanisa- 
                tion and lately a new investment allowance has also been 
                introduced. For the current year, the estimated cost for the 
                investment allowance alone is $6 million.
                       In the relatively short time since the special phosphate 
              and nitrogen fertiliser subsidies have been introduced, the 
              Government will have spent over $100 million on them by the end
              of this financial year.  These have helped the growers in the 
              high rainfall area, where most of the small growers are, much 
              more than the man in the large pastoral areas. Research has 
              been greatly encouraged and wool's competitive position has been 
              very much assisted by the increasing funds from Commonwealth 
              sources that have gone to the C.S.I.R.O. and Universities for 
              wool research. These funds have amounted to approximately 
              $2 million per annum since 1957.
                       In addition, the Commonwealth has made much larger 
               sums available for extension work and is, at the moment, at the 
              beginning of a five-year programme that will raise Federal 
               assistance for extension services to $5.4 million. Although 
               the States allocate these funds they have made it much easier 
               for the State Governments to support the work of such institu- 
               tions as the Hamilton Pastoral Research Station which, as we 
               know, has been of great advantage to all the district.
                        Large sums have been provided for promotion and the 
               Government has now entered a new programme of assistance for 
               research and promotion costing $14 million a year. Since 1964 
               the total amount that the Commonwealth has spent in subsidising 
               research and promotion is $32.3 million.
                        In general budgetary terms the Government has acted 
               firmly and resolutely to prevent inflation and to provide a 
               sound basis from which Australia as a whole can develop. The 
               economic measures of 1960/61 were designed to achieve this end 
               and it took no little political courage to introduce and stand 
               by these measures when it was known how unpopular they would be 
               in the short term. Although the general purpose of these 
               measures was to provide a sound economic basis overall, if any 
               industries reaped a particular benefit from them they were the 
               rural industries.

                                  — 3 —



             The real argument which of course was not stated*-- 

r1E=i.t, is that a wool marketing scheme has not been 

implemented that would guaranteea reasonable income. 

In dry seasons, and in periods of lower prices, it is under- 

standable that this problem should concern many growers. Let 

us look at the facts. Twice the industry has voted about a 

floor price plan. It has been twice rejected. On the first 

occasion the Federal Government actively supported it. On the 

second it stood aside but offered to arrange virtually unlimited 

capital backing if the growers votdd in favour of the Plan.

             With others, I publicly supported the Referendum, as

reference to the files of local newspapers will show, and the 

Government would not have offered financial backing unless it
believed the scheme to be feasible and sound. 3itte trowers`a4ainGloomy
                                                          !~       *~ L1
rejected the proposal. The implication                                         s that

the Federal Government should act unilaterally against the wishes

of the majority. However much I want a change in wool marketing

I could not support action that would directly negate the wishes

of the majority. This is not my idea of democracy or fair play.

             Does anyone forget that the Referendum was held because

Graziers and the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation

decided, on forming the Australian Wool Industry Conference, that

there would be no change in wool marketing without a Referendum?

This was a condition of joining an organisation which both bodies

voluntarily established. It was a condition that the Government

accepted. The A.W.I.C. has been called the Parliament of the

wool industry. It provides, for the first time, a body which

should be able to speak with one voice for the industry,

especially since the A.P.P.U. is now included in its mwmbwrship,

             I hope that representatives of the Australian Wool

Industry Conference will be present at the meeting.to be held

in Hamilton on 21 June. If the industry is to achieve alterations

to the marketing system this is the body through which the grower

organisations should work. It was established by them to govern

and guide the industry and to advise the Commonwealth, and throgh

the Conference the industry and its members have their own special 
responsibilities. Attaching me will not absolve the industry from
these responsibilities.                                                                  ..../4
                                                                                      •

  e
6
                  4


          I know very well that the Federal Government has 
      its own particular obligations in these matters. It has 
      discharged them. It has provided continuous and significant 
      help to the industry. It has twice, at the request of the 
      grower organisations, sought to meet the wishes of the industry 
      concerning marketing. When a vote was taken the plans have been 
      twice rejected. However, the Federal Government will not, at 
      the request of a minority — even a substantial minority — overrule 
      the clearly expressed wish of the majority. I hope nobody will 
      suggest that in a democracy we should begin to ignore majority 
      decisions.

