<!--start metadata-->
Title: Where old friends meet
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 28/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 FOR PRESS
            WHERE OLD FRIENDS MEET
     In the English winter of 1957, Australian stage personality 
 Lorrae Desmond chatted with a group of seven shivering, homeless 
 children at London's Waterloo railway station.
     She handed each of them a pound note, and told them about 
 the wide country that was to become their home.
     One of the boys in the group was a gangling, bewildered 
 10-year-old.
     This week, in the steaming heat of Viet Nam, Lorrae met 
 a tall, young Digger, an ardent fan who bought her a bunch of 
 flowers and showed her around Saigon.
    The Australian soldier was Trooper Ian Bryce, now grown 
 up, but the same gangling boy who stood on the Waterloo boat train 
 platform 12 years ago.
     Trooper Bryce said: "There were seven kids including 
 myself. We were going to Australia under the sponsorship of 
 Dr. Barnardo's Homes.
     "While we waited for the boat train to take us to 
 Southhampton, Lorrae Desmond met us. She said we were going to 
 a terrific country, and that we would really like living there,
     "Then she gave each of us a pound note to spend, and kissed
 us goodbye.
     'After arriving in Australia most of us went to a Barnardo 
 Home at Normanhurst, in New South Wales.
     "We had been there six months when Lorrae returned to 
 Australia. One of the first things she did was collect us and take 
 us out to a show at the Tivoli in Sydney.
    "Since then though, the only times I've seen her have been 
 on television and in the papers. In that time I'd finished school, 
 joined the Army three years ago, and got engaged to a girl from 
Maitland.
    "But I've always wanted to thank Lorrae in some way, and 
when I heard she was coming to Viet Nam with the ABC dance band the 
chance presented itself.

                                   -2-

           "I made a point of seeing her and introducing myself. Then 
   I spent a couple of hours showing her around Saigon.

           "She was just as nice as I remembered her from before," 
  Ian added.

           And Lorrae really enjoyed her conducted tour of Saigon. 

           "It was marvellous," she said. "We rode about in one of
  those cyclos - you know, the three-wheel things where you sit in 
  front of the driver.

          "Actually, I vividly remember the time I saw Ian in London...
  it was two days after Christmas. In fact, I still have photographs of 
  our farewell," Lorrae said.

          "At the time I was in London for seven years. Every Easter
  and Christmas I usually took part in pantomimes for Dr. Barnardo 
 Homes.

          "They invited me to the station to see the kiddies off... 
 probably because I was Australian.

          "But the last place I expected to meet one of those children 
 was here in Viet Nam," she said.





                                    Lists: A
                                   Further information:
                         CANBERRA: Major Allan S. Hinds
                                      (65-4061) (49-6030)
                     OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS.


 29 March 1967
Directorate of PublicRelations,
Army Headquarters, 
CANBERRA, A.C.T.

