<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam, foreign policy
Description: radio talk
Date: c1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK



The Prime Minister has claimed that he supports principle, that
he upholds the traditions of Parliament.  He does this when it
suits him and not otherwise.  We already know what occurred when, 
for the first time in the history of the English speaking people, 
the Prime Minister failed to back the Speaker of his own choosing
who had taken disciplinary action within the Parliament. That 
brought Parliament into disrepute but there are other matters in 
which double standards have been revealed.


A person who wants to come to Australia to talk about cricket is
not allowed a visa to come to Australia.  Representatives of the 
P.R.G., the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam, 
against whom Australian, South Vietnamese and American forces 
were fighting until two or three years ago,, are encourage to come
to Australia.


Dr. Cairns, the Deputy Prime Minister, has made it quite plain
that he believes the P.R.G. are correct.  On more than one 
occasion in the Parliament in recent weeks, the Prime Minister 
has blamed South Vietnam and the United States for breaking the 
Geneva accords concerning the supposed ceasefire in South Vietnam. 
The Prime Minister ignores the fact that the North Vietnamese 
army has doubled in size in South Vietnam from 150,000 to 300,000
since the ceasefire was signed.  He ignores the fact that Russian 
tanks are within 20 miles of Saigon, that Russian and Chinese 
supplies have continued to pour into South Vietnam, down the
trails and into the South.  He ignores the fact that North 
Vietnamese forces have provided the stiffening in Cambodia which 
could well lead to the imminent fall of Cambodia to North 
Vietnamese subjection.


He blamed South Vietnam and the United States for this continuing
situation.   He has put the view that they are the ones that
have violated the ceasefire.  He puts the view that because we 
have representation in Saigon, we have a duty to make our 
objections known to Saigon and South Vietnam but not to North 
Vietnam, with whom his Government has also established diplomatic
relations.


If the Prime Minister was concerned for equality and for peace, 
at the very least he could and must have complained equally to
Saigon and Hanoi.  If he was more concerned with justice he 
would have blamed the aggressors and not the defenders.


And even though the South Vietnamese war was a divisive and 
difficult one for the Australian community, and even though 
Australia is not now directly involved in these matters as she 
once was, the double standards exhibited by the Prime Minister 
must appal many Australians.


We have other examples around the world. The Palestinian
Liberation Organisation is seeking to establish an office







                                                      ../2

in Australia.  Mr. Hartly, well-known in the Labor Party, was
promoting that move.  Bob Hawke, President of the Labor Party
and of the A.C.T.U., strongly opposed it. Because of his 
opposition and only because of it - for which I praise him 
fully - the Government refused to allow the appropriate 
permission and visas.

Last week in the Parliament, the Prime Minister made it plain 
that he was planning to reverse his plan and allow the P.L.O.
to establish an office in Australia. A day after the Prime 
Minister made that statement, terrorists from the P.L.O. 
attacked a number of people and held them hostages in a hotel
in Tel Aviv.   A number of people were killed. It was a 
blatant act of terror.

The P.L.O. does not even admit that Israel has a right to
exist.   Their stated objective is to destroy Israel. They have 
shown that they embrace the weapons of murder and terrorism 
against innocent people and against women and children and the 
Prime Minister makes it plain that he is going to allow them to 
establish an office in Australia, but a cricketer who wants to 
talk about cricket is not allowed to come to Australia.

The Prime Minister might believe that he is moving on the tide
of history.   He might believe that there is an inexorable 
movement in which those who embrace terror and murder and war
will be successful in their objectives.  If he believes that 
is the tide of history, there is little hope for the continued 
freedom for people who live in democracies such as Australia.

In democracies like Australia people are concerned for peace, to
lead their own lives unhindered.  There has always been a 
tendency for such people to believe that the rest of the world 
marches in the same way.

Such views invaded the democracies in the 1930's and paralysed
them.   Such views paralysed the League of Nations, made it
impotent against Italy's aggression in Abysinia. Such views
encouraged Germany to march into the Rhineland. The impotence 
of France's hundred dividions against three German battalions 
who had their withdrawal orders in their pockets if one French 
policer.an should say no, led quite directly to the 2nd World War 
and to the death of 60 million people.

When people in countries like the United Kingdom, France, 
Australia and the United States lose their will and resolution, 
they move the world inexorably into a dangerous and difficult 
situation in which those who wish to achieve their objectives by 
illicit means will become bolder, more aggressive and more 
dangerous.

The Prime Minister's actions have encourage the P.R.G. and the
North Vietnamese.   They have encouraged the Palestinian 
Liberation Organisation.

His actions over many months have concerned our old friends. 
His actions have been directed towards taking Australia to the 
third world and the socialist world, to opening close links
with China and with Russia. I have no objections to such 
links being established and, indeed, I pointed to a need to 
change the relationship with China in one of the first speeches 
I made as Defence Minister many years ago, but I do have 
objections to making these moves at the expense of Australia's 
natural interests and at the expense of the people who are our 
real friends.

It is double standards. Refusal for a cricketer to come to
Australia to talk about cricket, but admission for the P.R.G. 
against whom Australians fought, admission for the P.L.O. who 
embrace murder and terror against innocent people as a basic 
weapon.




                     **************

