<!--start metadata-->
Title: National Anthem, defence, Israel, Health Insurance Bill
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 9/12/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA                      PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
                                                    CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2800 
       HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES                     TEL. 721211











FO;`:~. INFORMATION OF PRESS GALLERY        i~ ~ Ii~GO : Sunday,
._._ 
                                            9 December, 1973.





       ELECTORAL 5j_ lEil7 N T BY THE HON. ri L C1 L RAS^R ,

       M.P. MEMBER FOR `:T,.lEN0N - 9 DECEMBER, 1973• 






          Last week the Parliament debated the Government's 


 intention to hold a vote amongst 60,000 people to determine


what should be Australia's new National Song.         The songs 


 involved are - 'Advance Australia Fair', 'Waltzing Natilda' 


 and 'Song of Australia'.





          The Opposition parties argued that Australia's


 present National Anthem, 'God Save the Queen', ought to


 be included in the poll.      By refusing to allow people to 


 vote on it the Government is virtually excluding 'God Save


 the Queen' from the possibility of choice.        That is wrong.





          While I can understand the arguments of thosewho 


 say there ought to be a distinctive Australian National Song,


 there are certainly many !people who would like to keep


 'God Save the ,ueen' .     I am one of them.     There are many 


 important links with the United Kingdom which ought to be


 maintained.     The Government seems to be doing everything      it 


 can to weaken them and break them.





          The other point which the Opposition disagrees with


 concerns the vote being held amongst 60,000 people.         How


 are those 60,000 going to be selected ? A matter as 


 important as this ought to be decided by the vote of all


 the Australian People.      The Government is not prepared 


 to have that.










          Over the .last year the Australian defence forces


 have been cut about more than in any other time during


 Australia's peace time history.         Tho CTovornmeat 

                         2.

allowed only 1,4 hours debate over this most important
matter.  Jim Forbes and two other Opposition speakers
were given 10 minutes each. Most of the rest of the
time was taken by the Minister for Defence. The 
Government has consistently refused to allow a major 
defence debate on statements made by Hr. Barnard.


        During this last week Members of the Labor Party 
showed that Mr. Hawke, Federal President of the Labor 
Party as well as President of the ~.C.'1.U., has brought 
considerable support for his attitude to the Arab/Israeli
crisis.  I have already made my own views known and they 
coincide very closely with Hr. Hawke' s .

        The Government's policy in this area is not even-
handed.  It is pro Arab and pro Russian, anti Jew and
anti American.  The Prime Minister only criticised the 
re-equipment after the Americans had begun an airlift of
equipment to Israel.  They had said nothing 'for the 
preceding 4 or 5 days when the Russians had airlifted in 
a mammoth quantity of equipment to Egypt and Syria.

        The Prime Minister had also said that President 
Nixon had alerted American troops for domestic reasons 
despite the fact that two weeks earlier Dr. Kissinger had 
said that that alert had been recommended unanimously by
the United States National Security Council. The hard 
information available to that Council concerning Russian
activities was very serious indeed. The Russians were about
to airlift substantial troops to the area. President Nixon 
was not even present when the National Security Council came 
to its recommendation.

        Mr. TJhitlam is all too ready to blame the United
States.   He is even now under im)lied criticism from 
China because recent reports have indicated that China has 
said it does not want American troops withdrawn and wants 
the 5-Power Arrangements in Singapore and Malaysia to remain.

                         3.


Mr. Whitlam believes, of course, that American troops 
should withdraw and that the 5-:l:'ower Arrangements should 
also be abandoned. Mr. Whitlam is out on the end of a
long limb.   His new friends in Peking chopped it off.



        Debate on the Health Insurance Bill was undertaken
during the week.  The Opposition parties have indicated 
that they are going to oppose this measure because it will 
destroy the existing health scheme which maintains a high 
standard of service and maintains freedom of choice for
patients.   We strongly believe that the Government's 
Proposals will result in increased cost to the great 
proportion of the Australian population and in the lowering 
of health care standards for Australian families.

        The Government's proposals are an alternative to
the present scheme and they replace it. It cannot be 
regarded as a modification or an adaptation.

        The Government plainly wants to establish a 
situation in which more doctors are paid on a salaried 
basis in community health centres and where there won't be 
the usual fee for service payment that applies now when
you go to your local doctor.  Under these circumstances 
there would be basically nationalised medicine.

        In addition to this, the Government's proposals 
would result in the destruction of private hospitals and 
of independent country hospitals.

