<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr Calwell's promises
Description: press statement
Date: 26/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                   PRESS STATEMENT:

                                   MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  November 26th,1963

                                                                                                                            MR. CALWELL'S PR0MISES


                                                                                  Malcolm Fraser said at Caramut -

                                                                                  As has been the usual practice with Labour Policy speeches 
                                   Mr. Calwell's speech included many promises which would cost a great
                                   deal of money.                                                    Mr. Calwell himself placed the cost at £200M. a year,,
                                   and he listed the items that would cost this amount.                                                                                                                                                                   This wasn't really 
                                   playing fair with the Australian taxpayer because if you go carefully 
                                   through Nr. Calwell's policy speech you would find many items which would
                                   cost money but which weren't included in his list of costs.                                                                                                                                                                                        If these are 
                                   added up they could cost an additional £200M, making £400M in all.

                                                                                  Mr. Calwell said he would get the money for these promises 
                                   from loans, but the Government has already sought all the loan funds it 
                                   can and Mr. Calwell would only get the money from loan funds if he raised 
                                   the general rate of interest or if he compelled investment in Commonwealth
                                   loans.                            Neither of these practices would be in Australia's interests.' 
                                   He then said he would get it from the natural increase in Commonwealth 
                                   revenue. He forgot however that this natural increase in Commonwealth 
                                   revenue funds is pre-empted for increased expenditure for payments to
                                   the States for roads, schools, hospitals and many other things.                                                                                                                                                                                                   This is 
                                   because an expanding population demands a greater expenditure. Financial 
                                   agreements with the States allow for an increased expenditure year by year. 
                                   In addition, each year there are more and more people of a pensionable age, 
                                   therefore without any increase in pension the sums to be provided grow.

                                                                                  Mr. Calwell can't spend these natural increases in Common- 
                                   wealth revenue on the things for which it is pre-empted and also on his 
                                   new promises. He would have to look for other sources of revenue which 
                                   he did not and of course would not mention. One would be straight out 
                                   inflation and the other increased taxes.

•                                  correspondent immediately said that many taxpayers would be getting an As soon as he heard M. Calwell speak, one noted Canberra 
                                   increased tax bill which would be greater than the benefits that may come 
                                   from Mr. Calwell's promises.

                                                                                                          Mr. Calwell doesn't seem to realise that politicians 
                                   can't act like Father Christmas, bringing us all presents that nobody has 
                                   to pay for.

                                                                                                          In case anyone feels that the Government has entered 
                                   into competition with the Opposition. on new proposals, let me put the whole 
                                   matter into perspective by pointing out th9t of the promises made by Mr. 
                                   Calwell one alone would cost many millions ^or°e £'s. than the proposals
                                   put forward by the Prime Minister.                                                                                                               The Government's proposals were 
                                   clearly modest in their cost, they were nevertheless especially selected
                                   to be of great value to the people they are designed to help..                                                                                                                                                                                             The Prime 
                                   Minister put their total cost between £52M. and £53M. whereas, as I said,
                                   Mr. Calwell's promises would cost about £400N.                                                                                                                                                      The Government's 
                                   proposals are sound and practical, Mr. Calwell's are not.



                                                                                                                                                                         o0o

