<!--start metadata-->
Title: First report from Ottawa
Description: United States visit 1964 - press statement
Date: 18/06/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         PRESS STATEI/ENT:

                                                                June 18th, 3.964


                      MALCOLM FRASER'S FIRST REPORT FROM OTTAWA

                      Since I last reported I have had a few days in Ottawa, 
         speaking to Government Leaders there, two or three days in Havard, speaking 
         to people from the Havard Centre of International Affairs, and also some 
         time in New York with representatives from the Australian Mission to the 
         United Nations. I sat in on some of the United Nations permanent
         Committees and spoke to people from several other countries. In this 
         report I would like to deal with my impressions from Ottawa.

         CONCERN WITH DOmESTIC ISSUES 

                      one of the first impressions I gained in Ottawa was an intense 
         pre-occupation by almost everyone I met with their own domestic politics. 
         I don't mean domestic in the sense of our State politics as opposed to 
         Federal politics, but domestic in the sense that eyes seemed to be turned 
         inward on to issues that concerned Canada and Canada alone„ Let me give
         an example of this.    prime Minister Pearson has threatened to test the 
         fate of his minority Government on whether or not he gets support for the
•       new flag. The flag that Canada has used to the present time has strong 
         links, as does the Australian flag, with the United Kingdom and the Union
         Jack.    The new flag would break these links. As I understand it, it has 
         a yellow background with some bright red Canadian maple leaves in the centre.

                      It might be thought that for a minority Government this is an 
        unwise issue with which to become concerned. It seems that it may well 
        make more enemies than friends. People with strong attachments for the 
        United Kingdom - and these are many, are offended at putting the old 
         Canadian flag aside. They say that this flag issue is an attempt by the 
        Government to consolidate French Canadian support from Quebec. One may 
        have thought that this issue of the flag is not one of great national 
        moment, but it is important emotionally to the country and it does run 
         the risk of dividing Canada on traditional lines, that is the English 
        speaking Canadian on one hand and the French Canadians on the other.

                     The flag debate had been postponed when I was in Ottawa and 
        it had not taken place, but the intense concern with this issue, almost 
        to the exclusion of all others,was just one example of how Canadians are
dit     looking to their own affairs and not to the world around them..
                     When I asked Canadians why this was so, they said -"Well, 
        world tensions are better, there is stability in Europe between the Warsaw 
        Pact powers, that is the Russian Alliance, and the Nato Powers - the Western
        Alliance. This give us validity to be extravagant over these domestic
        issues."     When I put it to them that the world situation was really not a 
        great deal better because of the intense difficulty and problems of South East
        Asia they were inclined.  say that Canada had traditionally looked to Europe 
        and was less concerned with and seemed more remote from South East Asia.

                     Apart from the Canadian Department of External Affairs I don't 
        think I met one Canadian who showed a real concern for what is happening in
        this particular region.   The Department on the other hand, and the Depart- 
        ment through the Government, has always played an active part in the 
        international sphere and through the United Nations in trying to do what it 
        can in South East Asia. In this regard their Department of External Affairs 
        is a very long way ahead of the Canadian people. Canada has played a 
        relatively leading part on the Control Commissions and Conventions which were 
        designed to secure peace in Laos for example , which were designed to but 
        which have failed. But this is something about which the average Canadian 
        is not concerned.



                                                                             /2

                

                      I sat in on one or two sessions of the Canadian House of 
          Commons. Although their procedures and Standing Orders have developed from 
          the same source as have ours in Canberra there are some very marked differences. 
          At Question time all the questions came from the Opposition members, there 
          were no questions by Government members. When an Opposition member asked 
          a question that seemed to be particularly pertinent or particularly difficult 
          the Speaker would get up and say - "The Minister may not care to answer this 
          question now because it is a serious one and obviously requires a considered
          reply."    However if, despite this, the Minister concerned feels he wants 
          to say something he may. This is, in fact, an operation by the Speaker 
          of the House of Commons which does nothing more than protect Ministers from
          the questioning of Opposition members. This should not be necessary. 
          In our Parliament I think Ministers are fully able to protect themselves, 
          and I can imagine the uproar that would occur if our Speaker attempted to 
          protect one of our Ministers in this way,or if our Speaker tried to prevent 
          our Prime Minister replying to a question in this way as I heard the 
•         Canadian Speaker try to prevent Prime Minister Pearson replying to one. 
          In two Question periods there was not one question on anything but
          domestic issues.

