<!--start metadata-->
Title: The last week of the Twenty third parliament
Description: press statement
Date: 29/10/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


      PRESS STATEMENT       October 29th,1961

            THE LAST WEEK OF THE TWENTYTHIRD PARLIAMENT
          A fair amount of the business of the last few days or even weeks 
       of the Parliament has involved routine legislation which is important 
      but to the lay person not particularly interesting. However, there 
      has been important legislation involving the Commonwealth Government's 
       contribution to the beef roads and to rail standardization agreements 
      with the various States. Legislation has been passed to make money 
      available for the beef roads in Queensland and Western Australia, to 
      enable rail standardization to begin in Western Australia and to assist 
      the reconstruction of the Mt. Isa-Townsville rail link. In addition to 
      this, arrangements for the Melbourne-Albury rail link, which was the 
      original standardization proposal, have been stepped up. Also, very
•     large sums have been made available to the N.S.W. Government for the 
      improvement of facilities at coal ports. This will enable these ports 
      to deal with the increased quantities of coal which will make it possible 
      to greatly increase exports.
          In addition to these measures, the Prime Minister announced 
      contracts for the second major stage of the Snowy Mountains project which 
      involves Victoria more than did the first stage. I think these contracts 
      have totalled about £20M. and will result over a period in very large 
      quantities of hydro-electric power being made available to Victoria.
          The other important legislation was that concerning the Australian 
      airlines. This legislation was in two parts. It first of all dealt 
      with re-equipment of the two major airlines indicating the Government's 
      intention that jet aircraft should not operate on our domestic routes 
      before 1964. It informs the airlines of the Government's intention so that 
      they can plan ahead. If modern aircraft are to become available to 
      Australia's airlines orders need to be placed, very often, years before 
      deliveries can be made.
          This legislation was, in addition, designed to give the private 
      enterprise airline - Ansett-ANA - some kind of continuity of tenure by 
      ensuring that fair competition will prevail between the two airlines.
          It is now past history that an effort was previously made to 
      nationalise the old ANA in the late 1940's. This legislation was 
      declared invalid by the High Court but a Government would not have to 
      nationalise Ansett-ANA to drive it out of business. All it would have

                                               SOB

               to do would be to greatly increase the landing charges at the different 
               airports and. to take all the mail freight away from the private enterprise 
               airline. At the moment, this freight is shared 50-50 between the two 
               airlines. These two measures alone would be sufficient to make private 
               enterprise competition with the Government airline quite impossible. 
               These measures were operating in this direction in 1949 before the 
               present Government took office.
                         The legislation that has been passed is involved and fairly 
               technical but it is designed to prevent the private airline being put 
               in an impossible position by these means.
                         The 50,000 or 60,000 shareholders in Ansett and the 8,000 
               or 9,000 employees in this organization should welcome this. In 
               addition, I believe Australians as a whole will welcome it and 
•              particularly the people from Western Victoria because a great saga is 
               involved in the growth of this airline and in Ansett Transport Industries 
               generally. It is well-known that Mr. Ansett started operations 
               driving one taxi between Hamilton and Melbourne. If the taxi broke 
               down in the daytime he is reported to have worked on it all night
               himself to maintain his schedule the following day. Mr. Ansett is 
               a selfmade man and his business is a selfmade business in the true 
               sense and I believe Australians should be proud that it is still possible 
               for people to build constructively in this fashion because it is of
•              benefit to the country.   If it was not for Mr. Ansett there would 
               be now only one airline in Australia because he was the only person 
               who was prepared to take up the challenge when the old. Australian 
               National Airlines organization was unwilling to carry on the private 
               enterprise airline. If this had happened, no matter how good the 
               Government airline service might have been, I am convinced that the 
               airline service in the air and on the ground would not be as satisfactory 
               as the present service. You have only got to compare what happens in 
               other countries where there is only one airline.
                         In the debate it was said that this measure is designed to 
               prevent the growth of TAA and ultimately to lead to its dissolution. 
               This is an absurd charge. Throughout the 15 years of its existence 
               this Government has been in control for 12 years. When this Government 
               took office, Trans-Australia Airlines were making a large loss. This

                    3
        loss has been converted into an annual profit of about £300,000.
        Its fleet has been greatly extended and modernised and the number of
        passengers it carries each year has increased twofold. If this is
        trying to kill TAA, the Government airline, then it is a strange way
        of doing it because it has grown from strength to strength and will
        continue to do so. What the Government says is, that there is room
        on the main Australian routes for two airlines and this is what the
        legislation tries to achieve for the future.
             It was unfortunate that this legislation was overshadowed
        by one of the shabbiest political tricks that has ever been brought
        about. Charges have been made against Senator Paltridge, the
        Minister for Civil Aviation, accusing him of trying to pressure
•       East-West Airlines to accept Ansettts take-over bid. There are many
        who may think that these accusations were designed to create a political
        atmosphere in which the N.S.W. Government could take away from the
        Ansett ANA group some of the most profitable internal air routes in
        N.S.W. which this group had developed and give them to East-West Airlines.
        This is, in fact, what the N.S.W. Government has done. These charges
        made against Senator Paltridge were completely baseless. I have
        personally seen correspondence between senior representatives of East-
        West Airlines and Senator Paltridge which indicates how baseless they
•       were. In July, 1960, Ansett did make a take-over bid for East-Nest
        Airlines. Conditions were attached to this take-over bid. If
        the conditions were not met the bid automatically lapsed I think about
        the end of May last year. During all the time in which the take-over
        bid was open to acceptance there was no correspondence or contact
        between Senator Paltridge and any person of East-Test Airlines.
        Subsequent correspondence covering a period of the last 12 or 15 months
        indicates the friendliest of relations between East-West Airlines and
        the Government and Senator Paltridge in particular. Letters had been
        written by representatives of East-West Airlines using Senator
        Paltridge's christian name, thanking the Senator for his assistance
        and ending with this kind of phrase: "My kindest personal regards."
        Representatives of East-West Airlines would certainly not have used
        these terms if Senator Paltridge had been trying to pressure them

                  _ 4

        into accepting an Ansett take-over bid.. The fact is that during 
        the period of discussion and correspondence between the Ivanister and 
        East4 est Airlines there was no take-over bid available. The only 
        take-over bid which had ever been made had long since lapsed and was 
        considered dead by all parties.
               It seems that the only conclusion one can draw from 
        all this is that these accusations made against Senator Paltridge were 
        designed to create a political atmosphere under which the N.S.W. 
        Government could re-allocate air routes in N.S.W. to the benefit of 
        East-West Airlines - the routes that were developed by the Ansett group. 
        Some of the most profitable ones in N.S.W. have br en taken from the 
        Ansett group and handed over. to East4'est Airlines in this last week. 
•       This, as I said, is a shabby political trick and no one should be 
        deceived by it.
               It is a pity that the last week of the twentythird 
        Parliament was marred by this business.

