<!--start metadata-->
Title: Victorian election, quarantine
Description: Broadcast
Date: 10/05/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  12LC'.


RADIO BROADCAST           SUNDAY 13th MAY 3HA
                          WEDNESDAY 16 th May 3LK 
                          THURSDAY 10th MAY 3YB



Last week I spent some time going around Western Victoria with 
the Premier, Mr. Hamer, and his Liberal candidates, for seats 
in the Lower House and in the Upper House. I believe that 
there is one thing in particular that impressed people that 
Mr. Hamer met, and that was his determination to see that 
decentralisation really worked. We now have a Premier who 
is dedicated to stop the overwhelming; growth of Melbourne 
and to achieve a balanced development right across the State.

As you know, his Government has introduced a number of policies 
designed to achieve this very end. We are seeing the results 
of it; we are seeing now the new factories being established. 
at Portland to produce pet food at an establishment cost of 
about 3, 000, 000. These factories will give added impetus 
to employment in Portland and this is good for Western_ Victoria.

Whatever governments might do, a great deal of thought will 
always rest upon those communities, and I am Quite certain 
that there are many local communities such as Hamilton and 
other centres of Western Victoria that are doing more on 
their own behalf, than ever before. They also know they are 
getting more support from the State than ever before. It is 
disappointing, therefore, for me to learn. some time ago in 
writing from the Commonwealth Minister for Urban and Regional 
Development that the Commonwealth has no specific plan to 
reinforce the Victorian Government's 10 Point Plan for 
Decentralisation, because if the Commonwealth had come in 
and reinforced what the State is doing with Commonwealth 
resources, I believe we would have achieved an even better 
result.

The Government is dedicated to the Albury—Wodonga project 
and it appears to me that the greater part of Commonwealth 
funds will be going to that particular operation and that 
they will not be trying to achieve a dispersed decentralisation 
broadly across Australia and it is the latter objective which 
I believe is more worthwhile.

I was disappointed to get an answer from Mr. Lionel Bowen, 
the Postmaster—General, on our country tel e;thones a short 
while ago. I had asked him if he would continue with the 
previous Government's policy of gradually taking_ over at a 
full departmental responsibility, private lines for people 
who live in country areas. This has been a significant task 
of many farmers and many people living in country communities 
and we introduced the policy some years ago of progressively 
taking over these responsibilities as departmental matters.

             2.




But Mr. Bowen has pointed out that he believes that there are 
a very large number of people waiting for telephone services 
in the more closely settled and the developing centres. By, 
that he means, in Sydney and Melbourne, and he continues 
"It would be unreasonable", he feels, "to ignore the needs 
of those people by devoting essential resources to cater 
for the needs of a lesser number of high class and generally 
low revenue services in rural areas".

I am afraid that those words carry a foreboding for people 
who want better telephone services in the country. I know 
in recent years that there have been very substantial 
improvements, but there is still much to be done, and I 
would hope that when this matter is examined in the Budget 
context that the rural communities and the expansion of 
rural telephone services will still get a degree of support 
from Commonwealth revenues.

There is one other matter that I'd like to mention and it is 
of enormous importance to Australia. It concerns V.I.P. 
flights and quarantine. It is becoming more common for 
Australian Prime Ministers, or even for Australian Ministers, 
to travel overseas on a V.I.P. flight, but when those people 
return in a V.I.P. aircraft, it is of the utmost importance 
that their aircraft go through the normal health and quarantine 
procedures that any commercial flight must. There is an 
example when this did not occur. The Prime Minister's V.I.P. 
flight returned from Mauritius only a few days ago, and there 
was a report in the "Daily Telegraph" in oydney which indicated 
that some flowers from Mauritius were in the luggage.- From the 
nature of the report it appeared that they had not been 
inspected properly by quarantine and Health Officers. I know 
that Mauritius is a high-disease risk area for Australia: 
foot and mouth is prevalent; if there is any dirt brought in 
in pot plants or flowers, i.e. pot plants with flowers growing, 
they could carry foot and mouth. So, these are very serious 
matters with the potential of great economic harm and damage 
to Australia.

I have just now had a letter from the Minister for Health who 
is responsible for quarantine, which indicates plainly that 
there was an oversight, and that the flowers in question were 
not declared to either Customs or Health Officers when the 
plane arrived in Canberra from overseas, and I hope that the 
Health and Customs Officers will take this lesson to heart 
and watch closely any future V.I.P. flights in order to make 
sure that the normal provisions are maintained and enforced 
just as rigidly on V.I.P's as on the average citizen.

From what I hear, no harm has come from this particular 
incident. However, there is a lesson in it which we need 
to take to heart for the future. It is my understanding 
that when they finally did hear of these particular flowers 
the Customs Officers inspected them closely and had satisfied 
themselves that there was no risk to Australia, or to Australian 
industries as a result of their importation. This type of 
event must not be allowed to happen again.

