<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian-Vietnamese co-operation
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 23/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  FOR PRESS                            10/7/ No. 4875

                                    Directorate of Public Relations, 
                                    Army Headquarters, 
                                    CANBERRA, A.C.T.

                AUSTRALIAN VIETNAMESE CO-OPERATION

         Nui Dat, Vietnam: Australian and Vietnamese troops this week 
  combined on a search and destroy mission in Phuoc Tuy Province and 
  delivered another telling setback to the Vietcong.
        With the Monsoon season just starting in the Australian Task 
  Force area of responsibility the Vietcong will face hard times trying 
  to find enough rice and general supplies, plus medical and ordnance 
  equipment to keep them efficient.
        The Allied operations in Phuoc Tuy Province during the past few 
 months have had only minor contact with the enemy forces but have 
 uncovered and captured tons of Vietcong supplies, ammunition, weapons 
 and medical stores.
        This was again the pattern this week when Alpha Squadron of the 
 3rd Cavalry Regiment from Puckapunyal, Victoria, combined with 3/48th 
 Vietnamese Army Battalion to search and destroy three reported Vietcong 
 base installations east of the Task Force Base at Nui Dat.
        Australian armoured personnel carriers took the Vietnamese
 troops to their objectives and provided gun support during the search 
 and destroy patrol phase.
        No contact was made with enemy forces and there were no Allied 
 casualties during the operation.
        Intelligence reports proved correct and the Allied force destroyed 
 four Vietcong base installations, one which showed signs of recent 
 completion and occupation.
        Additionally two tons of rice was uncovered during the operation 
 and taken by the Allied force.
        Assisting the Vietnamese to mount and conduct their own field 
 operations is one of the prime tasks of the Australian force in Phuoc
 Tuy Province.
        This ranges from ground troop support, armoured carrier assistance, 
 aviation - both reconnaissance and strike aircraft - and artillery cover.


                                    Lists: A and B
                                    Further information:
                           CANBERRA:Major Allan S. Hinds
                                      (65-4061) (49-6030)
                       OTTER STATES:ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

23 May 1967

