<!--start metadata-->
Title: Referendum on Aboriginal rights
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 26/04/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•       ,                        ~~.,,~                      /,,,t,„7/- A)



                   During the last couple of weeks there has been a great
           deal of publicity about aborigines.
                   The full spotlight of publicity has been turned on the
           question of aboriginal welfare and their future place in Australian
           society.The Commonwealth will have an inevitably increasing role
           to play in these matters.
                   Following the referendum, placing additional responsibilities
           on the Commonwealth and following Prime Minister Gorton's election
           as Leader, Mr Wentworth has been appointed as Minister in Charge of
           Aboriginal Affairs.
                   Over a long time, Mr Wentworth has been a controversial figure,
           always stimulating and often provocative. But he has had an enduring
           interest in the welfare of aborigines, and was a foundation member of
           the Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
                   And in the Northern Territory he got down to the basic problems
           involved in lifting the level of the aboriginal and in educating the
           public in a wider understanding of the problems that are involved.
                   Bill Wentworth's theme was how to help the aborigines help
           themselves      and that this is the only approach that will lead to 
           along-term solution to the position of the aborigines.
                   He stressed the importance of this view at the different 
           missions we visited.... Hermansberg in the Centre, at Groote Eylandt, 
           at Yirrkala in the North East of Arnhem Land, at Maningrida, at Daly 
           River.
                   He was concerned to find out what the Commonwealth can do to 
           assist in this process.
                   Some time ago a small tribal group of aborigines, the Gurindjis, 
           walked off the Vestey-owned Wave Hill property because they were 
           dissatisifed with conditions on the property and because they wanted 
           their own place.
                   Mr Wentworth set off from Darwin to visit them and to discuss 
           their problems.
                   He listened to the problems of the Gurindjis, who asked for 
           enough land to set up a village and paddocks for a brumby breaking 
           centre.
                   He listened      and later said he believed they should receive 
           and deserve help, although he could not make promises at that time.
                   He said, 'Like other aborigines, they should be brought to the 
           state at which they look after themselves.
                                                                                 /2

1              —2—
     'It seems to me they have been making moves in that direction
  and deserve support. They were good types with a native dignity
  and a good deal of resolution.'
     The Northern Territory Pastoral Lessees Association, through
  its Executive Secretary, cautioned that the subdivision of any property
  could cause innumerable managements problems and disputes.
     But while I know that the view of other people will be well
  taken into account by Mr Wentworth and the Government, Mr Wentworth
  will be pressing for what he believes to be right for the aborigines.
     Summing up his Northern Territory visit, Mr Wentworth said
  Australians had given aborigines the feeling that all people were
  out to exploit them. They had been left with the idea that they
  could not work for their own good.
     He said, 'They have got the idea that if they work somebody
  else jumps in and takes all the profits. This is not going to be
  so in the future'.
     He strongly believes the aborigines should be made less
  dependent than they are now.
     The Government faced genuine difficulties in education
  of aborigines, and cane of the major problems concerns the lack
  of motivation which seems to be a retarding factor at about the ages
  of 12 and 14. Up to this age they hold their place with other children.
     This is a problem which my own administration faces in a
  number of schools in the Northern Territory and it is a problem which
  Mr Wentworth will be facing at the schools in aboriginal settlements.

