<!--start metadata-->
Title: Housing, drought relief, medical benefits
Description: Radio talk
Date: 4/10/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    Sunday, 4 October, 1970 - 3HA 
RADIO TALK          Thursday, 8 October, 1970 - 3YB


    This week I would like to talk about housing aims in the seventies..
 ..ammummEnt the possibility of improved drought relief arrangements 
 and Government policy on medical benefits.

    Factory production of homes could well be a feature of the late 
 seventies in order to satisfy anticipated growth which the skilled 
 building labout force might not be able to meet.
    Of interest to listeners is a Department of Housing report tabled 
 this week that shows that in the quarter to June this year there was a 
 decline in demand for new houses in Victoria. This decline resulted in 
 keener competition to sell. However residential land, both for home 
 sites and flat development sites, remained in strong demand.
    In the same quarter there was a marked easing in the shortage of 
 rental accomodation in country areas which is believed to be due in part 
 to increased Housing Commission construction.


    The Consultative Committee on Drought is exploring the possibility 
 of improving drought relief reimbursement arrangements between the 
 Commonwealth and State Governmebts.
     I believe it is essential for the States to know41.in advance of 
 a droughttwhat , in general, the Commonwealth would do to assist them.
    '~Ín this way, any State affected by drought will be in a position to 
 let farmers and graziers know the range,extent and conditions of the 
 drought relief measures available to them immediately drought declaration 
 is made in respect of any area.
     This, of course, will help remove the uncertainty that has proved 
 a difficulty to producers in planning their drought strategy.
     At itEnin ing the Consultative Committee reviewed the procedures 
 followed in different States in making drought declarations. It also 
 considred the wide range of assistance that States were now extending to 
 farmers and graziers affected by drought and discussed conditions attached
 to Commonwealth reimbursement to States for expenditure made by them on
 drought assistance.
     It is normal Commonwealth policy to assist a State in financing 
 natural disaster relief when it is considered that the cost of financing 
 relief measures would impose an undue burden on State resources.
      Commonwealth drought relief assistance has been provided on 
 the basis of reimbursing the States for four main categories of relief
 measures:

The four main categories are:

    . Loans for carry-on and re-stocking purposes where 
      credit is not available through normal channels.
    . Rebates of freight for the transport of fodder and
      water to drought-affected areas and the transport of 
      stock out of drought areas. Also the transport of stock 
      to areas that had recovered from drought.
    . Grants to local councils and other authorities to provide 
      relief work for those unemployed in rural areas as a 
      result of drought, and
      Some miscellaneous items of expenditure associated with 
      drought.

Commonwealth reimbursemnts to the States under all drought relief 
arrangennts takes the form of interest-free 'oans where the States 
themselves made loans. Other reimbursements of expenditure takes 
the form of grants.
 The Commonwealth normally imposes no limit on the amount of 
reimburseable expenditure on on those measures by State Governments. 
It is left to each State Government to administer its assistance 
according to the State circumstances.
  However, each State receiving reimbursemxts is normally expected 
to make some initial contribution from its own resources towards 
drought relief for its own producers.
  The Consultative Committee is exploring ways of improving these 
arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States.
  The Committee is also considering measures for a more uniform 
system of road and rail freight concessions, including interstate 
transport where necessary.
  Other aspects under discussion were problems of re-stocking after 
drought, encouragement of storage of fodder and feed on the property.
  It is recognised quite fully that there is a need for both 
scientific and economic research into implications of drought for the 
primary producer, for Governments and for the economy as a whole.
  While, fortunately, the economy as a whole is today better 
cushioned against the effects of drought than was the case in earlier 
years, the impact of drought on the rural sector is still direct, 
severe and inescapable.
  (In Australia we simply must have measures to counteract its
effects and a contiuing effort to improve our defences against
  Brou_ h A

 It is expected that the work of the Consultative Committee on Drought 
which comprises Federal and State Government representatives will play 
an important part in ximxiatixg cushioning the drastic effects of drought 
on the primary producer.

