<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Description: press statement
Date: 12/10/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  •
.                   12th October, 1960.
  PRESS STATEMENT BY MALCOLM FRASER M,P MEMBER FOR WANNON.
     Last week, Parliament debated the Estimates for the 
  C.S.I.R.O. The Commonwealth Government has shown that it places 
  great importance on the work that this organisation does by the 
  fact that it has increased the funds available to the organisation 
  from £2M. to £9.5M. a year, and by the fact that it has encouraged 
  industries to establish their own research funds which the 
  Government has subsidised on a pound for pound basis.
     However, even though the Government has demonstrated that 
   it places great importance on the work of the C.S.I.R.O., I would 
  place even greater importance on its work for I believe that a 
   modest increase in the funds available to this organisation could, 
   over the years, represent benefits to Australia's rural industries 
   which few farmers would believe possible at the present time.
     I have three main reasons for placing a great deal of 
   importance upon the work that the C.S.I.R.O. does so far as rural 
   industries are concerned. The first is that the C.S.I.R.O. is 
   now covering a much wider field than previously. In the last 
   4 or 5 years a great deal of research has been undertaken in the 
   northern areas of Australia which was not previously the case. 
   Although this has not led to an absolute reduction in the amount 
   of money available to solve problems in the South, it is true to 
   say that most of the new money going to C.S.I.R.O. has gone to 
   tackle Northern problems. Having regard to the fact that salaries
   and costs generally have increased considerably over the last 
   few years, the amount of research that has been done in the 
   problems of the South has in real terms, fallen off though the 
   number of pounds devoted to this end has not been reduced. I 
   believe this -to be wrong. If the C.S.I.R.O. is covering a wider 
   field, resources should not be diverted from one avenue to another 
   but new resources should be made available to tackle the new
   problems.

 •
               -2-
     The second reason is the great contribution that improved
techniques and new discoveries can make to the reduction of costs for 
our primary producers. Having regard to the fact that export prices, 
with the exception of those i5 r beef, are not satisfactory, and having 
regard to the fact that costs have been rising, the C.S.I.R.O. could 
well play a great part in enabling primary industries to remain 
independent and strong and continue earning the overwhelming part 
of our export funds. There is plenty of room left for expansion of
C.S,I,R.O. activities because there is work that has not been under- 
taken vigorously that should be undertaken vigorously. I do not 
quarrel with the order of priorities which the Axeeutive of C.S.I.R.O. 
has established but I feel that there is work that is so important 
that is not being done that funds should be made available for it and 
I would give one example,
     One of the greatest costs to people on the 30 million acres 
of improved pastures of Australia is the cost of fertilisers which 
is probably 99% of the cost of super. At the present time, we do not 
know very much beyond the fact that our soil needs super, so we put 
on half a bag or a bag a year and most of us hope that this is what 
is needed but there is strong evidence to show that after 20 or, 
perhaps, 30 cwt, has been put on per acre, the balance in the soil 
changes because the residual effect of super, is sufficiently great 
to enable the annual dose to be greatly reduced, or perhaps the 
balance is so changed that something is needed in addition to the 
super, which would greatly increase productivity. Initial experiments 
in South Australia and around the Crookwell district of N.S.W. lend 
weight to this point of view, In this regard it is worth noting 
that there is a particular experiment being undertaken to ascertain 
the exact amount of super, required in the wheat districts round 
Wagga, It is known that the requirement varies from 50 to 500 lbs, 
With the resources available to the Research Officer in charge, he 
will probably have the answer in 10 or 15 years. With two or three 
extra assistants he believes he could have the answer in L years,
     There is a third reason that makes these matters

                          _3— 
important. Our reserves are not unlimited. At Nauru and at
Christmas Island Australia has phosphate reserves for L10 years. So 
far as I know, there are no known reserves beyond what is on these 
two islands. About one-third of all the phosphate available to this 
country has already been used. For this reason alone, any experiment 
that will make it possible for us > to get more efficient use from 
the fertilisers that we have is an experiment that is both important 
and urgent from the point of view not only of reducing farmers' costs 
but from the point of view of conserving fertilisers which are vital 
to the 30 million acres of improved pasture in this country.
        For these reasons I believe more funds need to be made 
available to the C.S.I.R.O. Firstly, because the organisation is 
now trying to cover a much wider field than before. Secondly, because
of the great c•i•u ion hat an be made to the red t of
farmers' costs, - •     jclearly research 72rojects„„co 44 
 eu ued much more vigorously if more funds were available; and 
        our fertiliser reserves are not unlimited and increased 
scientific knowledge would enable us to use these resources much 
more widely.

