<!--start metadata-->
Title: Cuba
Description: press statement
Date: 25/11/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:


                                                    November 25th, 1962


                               CUBA

             It is now some weeks since the world awakened to see or hear 
President Kennedy's historic statement of the 22nd October in which an 
ultimatum was given to Soviet Russia over the secret build-up of offensive 
nuclear arms in Cuba.

             The details of the President's statement are now well known, 
the most important of them, of course, being a blockade of Cuba to prevent 
further arms being shipped to Cuba and a request that the Russians dismantle
the offensive weapons that have been established in that island. This 
request included not only the missile bases but also the returning of medium 
range nuclear capacity bombers to Russia.

             The President sought and achieved the unanimous support of the 
South American Republics. At the same time he took steps to refer the 
matter to the United Nations and U Thant, Secretary General, has accomplish- 
ed important work of negotiation and of mediation.

             The President called upon Chairman Krushchev to halt and 
eliminate the clandestine, reckless and provocative threats to world peace 
which were spoiling relations between their two nations." He called upon the 
Chairman to abandon his course of world domination and to join with the 
United States in an historic effort to end the perilous arms race and to 
transform the history of man.

             This historic statement of President Kennedy's brought immediate 
support from our own Prime Minister and from the Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom and from other Leaders in the Free World.

             President Kennedy's statement and ultimatum was made necessary 
because the United States' air watch over Cuba had shown that missile bases 
were being constructed in Cuba capable of launching missiles with nuclear war- 
heads. In addition, bomber 'planes had been supplied to Cuba with a nuclear 
capacity.

             Quite clearly, the United States could not tolerate a Russian 
nuclear missile base 90 miles from its own coast, a base which would have put 
every major city in North and South America within easy reach of short or 
medium range missiles.

             The news that the Russians were building missile bases in Cuba 
came as a greater shock because, in the days immediately preceding the 
President's announcement, Russian representatives in the United States had 
assured the world that there were no missile bases in Cuba and that the only
arms being given to the Cubans were defensive arms. This was plainly not true.

             For some time, nobody knew what would happen. There were reports 
of a large Russian convoy on the way to Cuba and of the possibility of a naval 
clash. This did not occur. Russian food ships were allowed through the 
blockade but the ones carrying missiles scattered and never reached the 
American blockade ships.

             The first Soviet statement on the issue was a long one which, in 
fact, said nothing. This seemed to indicate that the Russian leaders did not 
know which way to act. Later statements made by Chairman Krushchev said that 
the Russians would dismantle the weapons that the United States regarded as 
offensive and return them to Russia provided the United States would give a


                                                                  /2.

