<!--start metadata-->
Title: Opening of 1963 federal election campaign
Description: press statement
Date: 10/11/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        PRESS STATEIvENT:

        MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                         November lOth,1963



                      Last week the official campaign for the twenty-fifth 
         Parliament began.

                      As many of us expected Mr. Calwell did not devote very 
         much attention to some of the Vital foreign policy issues that have 
         arisen since the last election and on which the Australian people are 
         being asked to give a judgment at the present time.

                      At the conclusion of his speech he referred briefly to 
         Labour's policy on Malaysia, to its policy on the North-West Cape - 
         which could destroy the American alliance and, thirdly, he re-affirmed
         Labour's policy in relation to the nuclear free zone. However, I 
         have already explained these matters.

                      Mr. Calwell's speech revealed the fact that the Labour 
         Leader has learned nothing from the mistakes of Labour strategy in
         previous elections.   He has entered a bid for Australian electoral 
         support by promising benefits and new payments of many kinds. Dr. 
•        Evatt made this mistake on a massive scale in 1954. It has been 
         repeated more or less regularly at other election campaigns since.

                      No ohe would deny that many of the things that Mr. 
         Calwell says he will do are attractive taken in isolation, but when 
         you lump them all together and realize that you and I and every one 
         of us would have to pay for them the matter must be viewed differently.

                      Mr. Calwell doesn't seem to realize that there aren't 
         two sets of people in Australia - one to whom benefits are paid and
         another from whom taxation is collected.    As a noted Canberra 
         correspondent pointed out, many of the people who will be getting 
         increased benefits under the Calwell plan would be presented with a 
         new tax bill which would more than out-weigh the benefits. Previous 
         elections have shown that the Australian people cannot be bought by 
         this kind of auction and :t is my belief that this one will prove the 
         same thing.

•                     Let me have a look for a moment at the things that have 
         been promised by the Leader of the Opposition so that you can judge 
         for yourselves what the cost may be. I will start from a press 
         statement issued by Mr. Calwell on Friday because in this he purports 
         to give the cost of these proposals. He says that the total would 
         be about £200M a year. This isn't really playing fair with the 
         Australian taxpayer. The things Mr. Calwell mentions may cost 
         £200M a year but there are many things in his policy which are going 
         to cost large sums of money which are not included in Mr. Calwell's 
         list and these could cost an additional £200M a year, Making about 
         £400M in all.

                      Let me just mention one or two of the matters and you 
         will see how expensive they could be. He said he was going to 
         establish a naval base in Western Australia; that he was going to 
         purchase or lease an aircraft carrier which would, of course, involve 
         the purchase of modern planes for use with the carrier because the 
         planes which have and are being bought by the present Government are
         designed to be land-based planes.  Modern carrier planes are, of 
         course, notoriously expensive - as would be a modern carrier. Some 
         idea of the increase of cost could be gained from the fact that a 
         world war spitfire cost about £10,000 and a Mrage, which will shortly 
         be going into service with the R.A.A.F., is going to cost £lM or more.



                                                                      `2

                                         2


                  Mr, Calwell included promises of greater expenditure in the 
       north and of standardization of railways in the Northern Territory. He 
       also said that Australia would enter negotiations with the New Zealand 
       Government in efforts to establish an overseas Shipping Line. I don't 
       think anyone would suggest that any of these measures would be cheap. 
       When they come on top of the £200M a year that Mr. Calwell mentioned it 
       is plain that the Labour program would be an expensive one for the 
       Australian people.

                  The Leader of the Australian Labour Party said that this 
       program would be financed out of the natural increase in revenues that 
       are coming to the Commonwealth in each year. What he failed to under- 
       stand was that these increased revenues are nearly all committed before
       they are received by the Commonwealth.  With an expanding population 
       we have constantly increasing expenditures in social services, in housing, 
       in payments to the States fsr education and hospitals, or in such matters
       as the Commonwealth payments for road Construction. These expenditures 
       arise automatically each year in accordance with formulae that have been
       laid down and agreed upon between the Commonwealth and the States.
       These casts must rise each year because of our increase in pspulation
       and living standards.   Mr. Calwell cannot spend the expected increase 
       in Commonwealth revenue in the manner in which it is at present committed 
       and, at the same time, spend the money on these new proposals.

                  Let me look at it in another way. Social Services and 
       national welfare, in which is included repatriation, is this year 
       costing 98% 4f all the personal income tax collected last year. If 
       Mr. Calwell was going to add £100M on to the cost of national welfare 
       that means we are going to pay a great deal more in social services 
       than is at present collected. by Commonwealth income tax.

                  There are only two ways in which Mr. Calwell's program could 
       be paid for and which ever way he adopted the result would be the same. 
       You and I, as taxpayers or as Australian citizens, would bear the cost. 
       He could pay for these proposals by plain straight out inflationary 
       finance or by increasing taxation.

                  Mr. Calwell no doubt believes that there is safety in 
       vagueness over the cost of his financial proposals instead of saying
•      these are things that have to be paid for. He calls these various 
       proposals an investment, thus trying to give them a more attractive 
       name, but investments also have to be paid for one way or another.

                  I have never been able to understand any political leader 
       acting in a manner that denies the full facts from the Australian people. 
       Australians are too intelligent by far not to recognize when they are
       told half a story or given half a case. I believe Australians can 
       accept blunt talk and can accept something unpalatable if they can be
       persuaded that it is right.   I don't believe anyone however will 
       believe that a political leader can act like Father Christmas bringing 
       us all presents that we do not have to pay for.



                                        e0o

