<!--start metadata-->
Title: How much is Australia worth?
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 2/05/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  P1 • HOW MUCH Ia AUSTkA1,ÌA iNORTH!

    At times .e have all heard peoplecrying out against the waste of
resources that are being put into the defence of our country. This attitude, with 
hungry millions of people not farfrom our northern shores, at the least is playing 
into the hands of the communists at the worst it is support of Communist proproganda. 
The question is just how much is this country worth with its great potential of 
haven for millions more Australians than we have at present.
lie -e tt
    Defence of our country is insurance and safeguard for future generations. 
It is normal practice for farmers to insure their buildings, fences and stock 
against fire in our summer months, we insure our cars against theft or damage, 
while shops, houses and factories in the towns and cities are insured by their
owners against damage of many kinds. Many of us insure our lives that we may enjoy 
greater prosperity as we get older or so that when we die, greater security and 
provision will be left for our families. All these things are so normal and
accepted that we are surprised more if they are not done than if they are.

     In every corner of the land the Government does its best to insure us 
all against danger from within. Many of you will remember the riots that broke out 
in Melbourne during Cup week in 1927, after the police were withdrawn from duty because 
of a strike. It was necessary to call for volunteers to keep order and peace in the 
city and even so one volunteer and several rioters 'lost their lives. Calmly and 
quietly our police force goes about its business enforcing the just and fair lee. 
In things great and small, whether it be a parking offence, or a question of murder, 
they add their bit to our general peace, that we may leave our homes and expect to 
find them as we left them when we return, that our children may wander about without 
fear of molestation.

     In these things the police are an insurance against civil distuubance. We 
expect the police and the government to do this job, if they did not we would soon 
demand the reason why.

     When we move further afield the need for insurance is not so evidently 
recognised, but What is the good of safe-guarding domestic peace if we do not take 
steps to prevent disturbance from without our borders. The only way we can do this is 
to be strong within ourselves, to develop our resources that we may support more 
people and finally to have the nucleus of a defence corps constantly at our disposal. 
The £200 million a year we spend directly on defence and defence research surely is 
not too high a price to pay for the future security and happiness of Australia.

     It is a wrong thing to suggest that possession of such a defence corps 
shows a warlike attitude. Within our borders we do not hear people saying that 
the existence of a necessary and efficient police force displays an anti-social 
attitude. We know very well that if these men were not present everywhere to 
protect our lives that it would be an open invitation to that small band of lee- 
breakers, the failures and mistakes found in every community, to steal and pillage 
without fear of apprehension. In the same way a defenceless country is at the 
mercy of people in other lands, who having failed to create peaceful societies 
within their own borders, seek only to conquer and disrupt the peace and prosperity 
of contented nations.

     We must remember too that a strong country is less likely to be attached 
than a weak and wealthyone. Australia is obviously wealthy with great resources 
yet undeveloped, weak and defenceless she is an open invitation to the 1000 million 
Asians in the north.

     We must combine to insure Australia just as each year we insure on our 
houses, farms shops and factories. The two things are not separate units but part 
of one live body, a part of our Australia which offers a great future far all of us, 
a future that must be safeguarded and defended that Australians may always remain 
free (and proud) in their own country.
      Above all we must not betray our men and women who have fought in four 
wars. sue must remember wives who lost their husbands, and children who have
grown up without knowing their ûmeiimmdm fathers. we must remember the men who were 
disabled and who suffered in these wars, many of whom made the greatest sacrifice 
that we may live and prosper,

