<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence policy
Description: Radio talk
Date: 15/11/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                 Sunday 15 November 1970 — 3HA 
                Thursday 19 November 1970 — 3YB
RADIO TALK

   This week I would like to talk with you about what the Government 
regards as Australia's need for a threefold approach to its defence policy.


   Australia's strategic environment is bound by the waters of the 
Indian and Pacific Oceans and by the countries to our north — South East 
and East Asia.
   Every major event within this environment has some repercussion 
in Australia.
   We are part of the environment and we are affected by it. So too 
will the policies and attitudes adopted in Australia affect the destinies 
of other countries in our region.
   For most of our history major powers have been actively involved 
in the stability of our region. Today their role is changing.
   The British commitment in Singapore and Malaysia will be much 
reduced in the future.
   The United States is re—assessing the manner in which she would 
fulfil her commitments and alliances.
   It is clear that if countries expect assistance in the future, they 
must earn that assistance.
   After Vietnam, Australia will not be able to relax.
   Because of uncertainties in Asia, the development of Soviet Sea 
power in the Indian Ocean and changed British and United States attitudes, 
a greater effort will be required of Australia.
   The Government believes there is a need for a threefold approach 
to our defence policy.
   First, we must develop further our own defence forces and our 
self—reliance, even though Australia's armed forces are now better trained 
and better equipped than at any time short of global war.
   This year we have added Phantoms to the Airforce and more Sky Hawks 
to the Navy.
   We have ordered additional Oberon submarines and have commenced 
studies for an Australian designed and built destroyer.
   In the last five years we have spent more than $430 million 
improving bases and adding to the general capability of the Army.
   We are developing airfields and base installations for the support

               2.

of our forces.
   An important decision concerns the development of a Naval Base at 
Cockburn Sound in Western Australia. This has been warmly welcomed by the 
United Kingdom and the United States for its contribution to the defence 
capacity of the free world.
   Second. We believe that small countries should develop joint defence 
arrangements for their own region. Arrangements, sufficiently strong and 
sufficiently credible to be a deterrent in their own right to any aggressor.
   Australia is pursuing this course in the Five Power Arrangements with 
Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.
   Third. Despite their own efforts, defence of any small country 
ultimately rests upon the backing of larger powers. Accordingly, we maintain 
the closest co-operation with the United Kingdom and United States.
   This threefold approach involving our own self-reliance, regional 
co-operation, the backing of major powers, provides a credible, proper 
and sensible defence policy.
   It involves Australia playing a significant part in the region in which 
we live.
   This policy can only be continued if the present Government is maintained 
 in power.
   The Australian Labor Party has no constructive defence policy.
   The ALP claims to support ANZUS. But their actions would destroy it.
   The ALP policy of desertion in Vietnam would brand us as an unreliable 
 ally in South East Asia and the United States.
   The ALP policy of withdrawal from Singapore and Malaysia would shatter 
 regionalcbfence arrangements.
   By abolishing national service, the ALP would cut the fighting strength of 
 the Army by one-half.
   Labor's policy is to shrink into isolation behind Australia's shores, to
 turn our back upon the environment and to pretend that the world around usdoes 
 not exist.
   Labor's policy would encourage aggressive Communist movements in South 
 East Asia to believe that independent countries no longer had Western support.
   Labor policies ignore the Russian presence in the Indian Ocean.
   They would contribute nothing to stability and progress in South East Asia.

                                  /3

                    3.
   They would not bring security to Australia.
   The price of Labor's policies would be danger to our children.
   The Government's determination to develop further our own self-reliance, 
its strong belief in regional defence co-operation, its recognition that small 
countries ultimately could need the support of major powers, provides the only 
practical course for Australia.
   The Government's approach is directed towards achieving a world in which 
our children can live in peace.


                    ,....o0o ,

