<!--start metadata-->
Title: Army support for local industry
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 5/07/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                        \3ri _ Aa.2,





EMBARGO: NOT TO BE RELEASED BY ANY MEDIA BTFORE JULY 6 1967

FOR PRESS              No. 4926

         ARMY SUPPORT FOR LOCAL INDUSTRY
       Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
         the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.

    Eighty per cent of Army expenditure on its equipment programmes 

during the financial year 1965/66 was spent in Australia as a result of 
the Army's policy of supporting Australian designers and manufacturers.
    The Minister for the Army, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, said this today when 
he officially opened the new Army Inspection_ Service building in Parramatta
Road, Concord, New South Wales.
    The Minister said that at times the Army had been under attack for 

not purchasing a greater part of its capital equipment programme in 
Australia. He said he wanted one thing very clear. The Army recognised 
that it was in its interest to purchase the maximum possible amount of its 
equipment programme from Australian sources. It was in the Army's interest 
to be dependent upon Australian factories for essential supplies and our 
policies were being directed to make sure that this was achieved to the 
greatest possible extent. The Army was'trying to give industry much earlier 
warning of requirements and was also trying to cooperate with industry in 
the initial design stage of many items° Although this was our policy and 
this was our objective, he said, he hoped that industry would understand 
when there were some specialist items which would probably have to come from 
foreign sources. For its part the Army would be working to reduce the 
incideLde of foreign purchase and hoped for the active cooperation of 
Australian industry in this objective.
   The 80 per cent allocation had been maintained during the past 
financial year, with total expenditure rising from $64 million to $86 
million_.

   A wide range of industries shared in the production of Army require., 
ments during the financial year 1965/66, with $4.5 million being spent on 
electronics.
   Nine million dollars was spent on vehicles and earth moving •_... 
equipment, $6.5 million on accommodation, camping, and general stores, and 

$7.8 million on clothing, footwear and raw materials.

   Engineering and miscellaneous stores firms received $4.9 million. 
while `;',` , million was spent on office machines and statior_e.ry.
   In the vehicle field, there had been close cooperation between the 
Army and International Harvesting Company involving an expenditure of more 

than $20 million for the development and production of the 2~/z ton and 5—ton 
general service load carrying vehicles and dump trucks for use both overseas 
and for training in Australia.
   The next major undertaking would be the replacement of the three 
quarter ton Landrover with the one ton Gen•:al Service vehicle.

   The outline specification óf the vehicle had almost been finalised 
by the Army Design Establishment, and it was expected that tenders would

                              -2-



 soon be called for the development of the vehicle. It is possible that 

 the contracts for this vehicle could be worth about $19 million.

        In the electronics field, two recent projects were the production !-;f• 

 a lightweight high frequency radio set, the PRC-F1, and Project "Mallard''.

        The PRC-F1 was developed by Amalgamated Wireless of Australia 

 Limited and electronic engineers from the Army Design Establishment and the 

 Department of Supply.

        Australian industry generally had been assisted in meeting Army 

 requirements by the close contact between the Army and the Department of 

 Supply, and by the earliest possible warning of a future requirement.

        The Army had also encouraged industry to introduce its own quality 

  control system, but carried out a verification of the quality and provided 

 certain laboratory and test facilities for the use of industries which had 
 not yet installed their own facilities.

        Consequently, the Army Inspection Service was equipped with its own 

 facilities for inspecting and testing, some of which were housed in the 

 new building at Concord, where the Service's activities embraced almost 

 every sphere of industrial technology.

       The main function of the building would be as a planning and 

 directional centre for all activities of the Inspection Service in New South 

 Wales, maintaining a complex system which would ultimately ensure the soldier. 

 obtained the best stores and equipment to fulfil his military duties.

       The Inspection Service operates not only for the Army, but also
in certain fields for the Navy, RAAF, the Department of Supply, as well
as many other Government Departments.

       In New South Wales alone last year the Army 'Inspection Service dealt 
with orders exceeding $60 million representing more that 7,600 orders placed 
with New South Wales contractors.



       NOTE FOR PRESS

       Mr. Tresser will open the new building at 105 Parramalrba Road, 
at noon on Thursday (July 6).                            Concord,





                                 Lists: A, B and C. 

                                 Further information:

                        CANBERRA:Major E. Roes-Smith
                                   (65-4061) (49-6030)

                    OTHER STATES:ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS.

  5 July 1967

