<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural finance
Description: press statement
Date: 17/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT
MALCOLM FRASER '  17 MARCH, 1967

         RURAL FINANCE

   There have always been discussions over the
availability of finance for rural development.
   This question has become much more important in post 
war years because of the need to increase production as perhaps 
the best response to rising costs.
   In addition, there is a natural wish to farm land as 
efficiently as possible. Many farmers take a pride in efficient 
and increasing production.
   Progressive development requires increasing resources. 
Additional water supplies, more intensive fencing, pasture 
improvement and herd improvement need considerable financial 
backing if they are to be successful. Very often, that 
backing needs to be long term, especially if difficult country 
is being improved.
   Traditionally, finance for rural development used to 
come from one of three sources, from surplus income, from the 
banks or from the stock firms. In post war years it became 
clear that these resources alone were not sufficient although 
they still remain as large sources of funds for development 
purposes. It was because they were not sufficient that the 
Government established the Development Bank which was to look 
to the possibility of the enterprise as being a success rather 
than to judge the project on normal trading bank standards. 
Over the years, finance for the Development Bank has been 
increased quite markedly. In its few years operation, capital 
has been increased from $31 million to over $60 million. Loans 
to farmers have totalled over $167 million and current loans 
are running at the rate of $50 million a year.
   The Development Bank does not compete with the normal

           2.

Trading Banks; it is designed to make finance available where 
it would not normally be available from the Trading Banks and 
for projects that would not come within the Trading Banks lending 
policies. The Development Bank does not'require as strict 
security arrangements as normal Trading Banks.
    However, since the Development Bank has been
established there have been additional moves. In April, 1962 
the Reserve Bank made arrangements with the Trading Banks which 
enabled them to establish what are called Term Loan Funds. 
Initially $114 million were available for this fund, but as 
this became committed, the size of the funds available for 
lending has been increased to $287 million.
    Term Loan Funds have made an important additional 
contribution to the farmers' requirements for medium-term 
credit. The purpose of these funds is to provide loans for 
capital expenditure in rural and industrial fields.
    In the farm sector the loans are made for development 
purposes, including the purchase of new equipment, clearing, 
pasture improvements, fencing and stocking.
    Loans are made from these funds for a fixed period, 
usually for about 3 to 8 years.
    New Term Loans from these funds for farming purposes 
amounted to 30 million dollars in 1965/66. This brought the 
total of such approvals since Term Loan -Funds were established 
to $131 million. On an average, over a third of all the loans 
provided are for farm purposes. In April, 1966, additional 
funds were established after discussions between the Federal 
Treasurer and the major trading banks. These banks have now 
established Farm Development Loan Funds to provide longer term 
credit to farmers. The banks initially provided $50 million 
for this purpose.
    Loans from this fund have ranged up to 15 years and in

w



         rare cases for a longer period. The actual term is, of course,
         closely related to the nature of the project.
            Loans from the Farm Development Loan Fund are
         directed mainly to developmental purposes which will raise pro-
         ductivity in rural industries.
            Loans amounting to $13 million were provided in the
         first few months of the Fund's operation and in the early
         stages, the lending rate was running to over $20 million a
         year.
            These are two measures that have quite markedly
         improved the Trading Banks ability to lend for rural purposes.
            Additionally, last year the Government told the
         Development Bank that we wish to see a larger proportion of
         the Development Bank's funds applied to rural loans and at this
         point of time about three quarters of the Development Bank's
         funds are running in this direction.
            These are all additional facilities that have been
         made available to farmers. I believe that they all indicate
         a significant improvement in the availability of finance for
         development purposes.
            I wouldn't for a moment say that the last move has
         been made in this direction, but I do believe that steady progress
         has been made and as we gain more experience with the Development
         Bank and as the Private Banks gain more experience with the Term
         Loan Fund and with the Farm Development Fund, further moves may
         become possible.


                 1

