<!--start metadata-->
Title: Air fire power demonstration
Description: press statement
Date: 24/10/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:


                                              October 24th,1965


                AIR FIRE POWER DEMONSTRATION


                Last Friday I went to Evan's Head, not far south 
of the Queensland border on the coast of New South Wales, to
witness the concluding stage of Operation Concord. This was an 
operation in which Australian, New Zealand and United States Air 
Forces co-operated in a defensive operation over Eastern Australia.

                It was the first time that the three Air Forces 
had each taken part in exercises of this kind, and it demonstrated 
the willingness of the three countries to work together in an 
operation in which aircraft from other parts of the world can be
employed to assist Australia.  The New Zealand 'planes of course 
came from New Zealand. Many of the American aircraft - F.105 
Thunderchiefs - came from bases in the Western Pacific that are
used to strike at targets in North Vietnam. The American 'planes 
came to Australia after having been re-fueled in flight by a giant 
Boeing 707 Tanker.

                As part of the concluding demonstration a re-fueling 
of one of the Thunderchiefs was demonstrated for the people who
were watching.  The pilot on the Thunderchief raised the receiving 
pod and the operator in the back of the 707 tanker manipulated a 
long arm into position so that the two aircraft were joined
together.   Fuel can be transferred at a tremendous rate.

                We saw demonstrations of low and medium level
bombing and of attacks by rocket. We saw the results of modern 
weapons and modern bombs that were all pretty accurately placed
on the target area.  It is clear from the demonstrations that the 
day of the conventional bomb, while not yet past will not endure 
for ever. Conventional type bombs are being replaced with bombs
that are designed to fulfil a special purpose. Some are designed, 
to use a euphemistic term, to be used against soft-skinned targets. 
Soft-skinned targets would include motor cars, trucks or people.

                We are, at the moment, only in the early stages 
of guided bombs, but I would not be at all surprised if, in some 
years, all bombs dropped from an aeroplane were directed or guided
on to a specific target.  This, of course, greatly increases the 
accuracy of air attack and increases the use of aircraft in a 
tactical role.

                We also saw examples of low level straffing 
attack from 20MM and 30MM cannon as well as from rockets. One 
of the New Zealand Canberras appeared to have approached too close 
to the ground and it had to lift its nose just at about the time
the rockets were fired, Thus, instead of landing precisely on the 
target the rockets covered an area possibly 1,000 yards or more
in length.   Luckily the observation post was slightly further 
away than this.

                The Mirage pilots came in incredibly low on their
straffing runs.  The Air Force officer sitting next to me told me 
he thought one of them came down to 50 feet. At something like 
400 miles an hour this doesn't give you much room for error.

                                                         /2

                              2


The display demonstrated not only the diverse capability of the 
aeroplanes concerned_but also the extreme skill and accuracy of 
the pilots.

                On our return from the bomb range we called in
at the major R.A.A.F. base at Williamtown. At this Base we were 
able to inspect at close hand some of the machines that had taken
part in the demonstration.  We saw the Australian built Mirage 
put out in various configuration carrying different bomb and fuel 
loads, and we also saw the large and heavy ground attack fighter,
the F.105 Thunderchief.  The Officer showing us around the 
aerodrome compared the Mirage and the Thunderchief as the thorough-
bred and the draughorse       That may be but in their specific 
roles both aircraft have an immense capability.

                I would imagine the pilots who were flying our 
aircraft, even in the last war, would now be surprised at the 
fantastic increase in electronics which are now a necessary part 
of any aircraft operation.

                We saw the maintenance section at Williamtown, 
which is responsible for keeping the electronic equipment in the 
Mirage up to the highest levels of efficiency, and we were more 
than pleased to learn that in some instances we were getting a 
higher degree of efficiency from the equipment than the French 
themselves who designed and constructed the Mirage.

                Williamtown is the major Australian Air Force 
Base. designed for the defence of the East coast, particularly 
for the industrial networks of Newcastle, Wollongong and Sydney 
which, it is felt, could be the first to come under attack if the 
Australian mainland were ever bombed.

                In addition to the Mirage and Sabre Squadrons 
stationed at Williamtown, there are also the Bloodhound ground
to air missiles.  Australia's Air Force is being modernised quite
rapidly.  The Avon Sabre is a sub-sonic fighter, which will have 
a continuing role to play in the Air Force, is being passed out 
of our front-line Squadrons as the Mirage are delivered from our
Australian factories.  This does not mean to say that the Sabre 
will not have a useful role, it will, but it cannot be compared 
to the Mirage which can t_t avel at more than twice the speed of 
sound carrying a more effective range of weapons.

                The strike arm of the Air Force will be immeasurably 
strengthened when the F.111 are introduced at a later stage. If 
all predictions and all tests to date are confirmed thiz will be 
the best aircraft of its type the world has ever seen and certainly 
the best aircraft for Australia's particular purposes.

