<!--start metadata-->
Title: Employment
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 19/03/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                    a/))tF

                  MALCQLM FRASItii, EIMER OR 
                       reports from Canberra on           K — /y]
                            =PLOW 4T.

              t aaek I s                                           the 

first of two reports on                                           as

singled out for attook in the reo t de na 
the question of camplkymert
           Last wacsk I: said that ood aLd eqt:ate9 houacirg for our
people is probably .he most                  al objective in al.gii.iae

society   That is true, but it               that cannot be obtained for 

the majority of our pe pie unl             a very 3is,(~?,L flteidartl of
employment.
           Throughout its                 Governapalioiea have been

dxreeated towards this ead and            aaras to go beck over the

figures will realise be truth       his The question of emploÿmnn t is 

vital be.crarxse of the effect it h on t individusl, bemrauee it moans 

the difference between happiness and des air for eaah~arsc.aa affected 

by it. This ir sommthing wbi¢+li ia not al.weyt rooareasead When people 

look at figures and quote Figures they forgot that each or that goes 

to sake u,~*~ that total is an individual with individual feelings and aioda. 

On the question of eoploymant whatever politicians say, it will be you

the people vho will judee: whether we have done the righ t things or the 
wrong thing.
               Today I want tea relate /fsriaus factors that have been 

influencing the present situation and I esat to say what the Government 

has already done to counteract forces which have led to a certain 
amount c„If unemployme a t through motions of the country. rev things

stand out clearly and both eve given rise to some unemploym tt.
               The most important has beau`, a very considerable) Sall in the 

price we get for any of our major ez orts. This includes, as •fro all. 
know, MAXonly wool but also dairy products and my of our metals like

eoppor and lead, the producers of whi oh are finding it dit j.tcult to 
continue in full production.
               The second f aotor has beien t be drought which hava affected 

eerta .n areas of Australia New South Wales and euseneland mont

Severely. For instance, of the 550 men seeking eaployesnt ati:he 

end of January, 56,000 came from these two States alone.

                     factors       jusmentioned have     t tha

             a       cowhich inG lntio                 ptoduoers, 

                     spend . thider these c i.rou,m touc w, s, people tend to

            bt       trac   this year be use my income is dawn, or

       put up t      shed until next year, or l won't renew my favtrary 

      nt for ano her year or two beaau.rie my income is aoen. r.t When a 

great number of people aturt saying this throughout tba county, then

    effect la to dampen the umount of acmand eau to ten tt to causo a 
    nia amount tif unemployment

            The Gal-extataoz'zt has recognised this und the. Minist for

  bour a   ati.anrtl. :erfTice has said txaat ties present situation gives

us no cause for eomplsoenoy but, at the same time, there is no reason 
to panic or to institute panic measures.

            We aust remember the long postwar f i€bt we had 

inf   ion end it would be PoQ lish now t is battle has been pretty w 

       eopardiee the position by premature lotion which could 4e a

        1 of harm4 beverthelesa, the Government has taken some con 

           Opt which only now will be beginning to be felt throughout
    ear n *,   The first was a special Premiere+ Conference called in 

             twin conference extra funds were made eva ila bie to the 

    es and ,lcs al governing bodies. It has been said that the sum of 

   000,000 de available was small but we must .remember that this sum 

   to operate only in the left four months et this financial year, to

the end/ of Junar,, and 48,0 0, 0t30 for tour months !.a equivalent te

284,040,4740 for l2 months so the crante are ltTger than one might tend 
to think.
                  1„Y, tha `i':redíng Danko have been given tra funds 

          special accounts held by the Commonwealth Bank to enable 

        norms* their levsl of advuaaoes.
            sQ far cas the future is caoncterneó             be

          nt closely. Last month the number             g Jobs
          der 5,000. If this trend does not continue    igeiíà7uri-b C!

Cju~~i~.y be brought into being to give an added stimulus thr!GAughOuti the 

economy so as tcr create more jobs. I am confident that, it necessary, 

this will be :ione.

