<!--start metadata-->
Title: "Pies"
Description: press statement
Date: 17/04/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  PRi.SS STATORIT                                             ~7     0
  MALCOLdd FciASSR s

           A few days ago,    re^      sbate in               on the
  questïon of wool "pies". Reg. P011    opened the de          e
  Opposition.  He spent a great proportion of time pro    v t teHouse
  that "pies  xisted and that "pies" operated against the interests of 
  woolgrowers.     ryone agreed with thie, because all qtr. Pollard was 
  doing was repea    the conclusion of the %.5. Royal Commission.
  Indeed there is evidence to show "pies" have operated since 1918.
           The attempt to charge the Commonwealth with inaction over "pies 
  was not realistic for the simple reason that the States have power to
  control "pies" while -;,F onwealth power, to say the least debatable« 
  wool auctions seer's held under State legislation, and the .Stet ee hava 
 power to alter that legisl ;tion at will. It is worth recall that 
 the Royal Commission into the Coulbu rn wool buying activities, and into 
  pies" themselves, was a Commission established by the N,$." . State
 Government. It was a Royal Commission that reported directly to the 
 New ,;outh *aloe State Government. It would be logical therefore to 
 expect the New outh ola3.es State Government to take some action on
 if it felt it wanted to do so. So     all it bas done is to give 
 copies of the report to various state /duistere- for Agriculture with the
 suggestion that the mutter will some time be discussed by the Agriaultura 
 Counc3.î..
                                           ®u New      h    ea, Victoria
 and Yestee                                on their statute books mr king
     legal for the transfer or             lots of cattle or farm produce
 purcthaued at auction. When the le      on in these three Status was
  irst passed, farm produce specifically excluded wool It is aignifican
to note that since the Acta were first introduced, amendments have been 
made in the appropriate Acts of New South. Y ales, Victoria and Veetern 
Australia, extending the definition of far produce to include wool.
These amendments have never been proclaimed, and therefore they have never 
 perated. If these Acts, or if the amendments to these Acts were
procleimed, it wou d, to all intents and purposes, make '°pies" illegal. 
No Stater has taken this action.

                                   2
          There seams little point in charging the Commonwealth with
inactivity in this particular sphere when three States have legislation 
on their Statute books which is admirably suited to controlling "pies"
if they to wished. The three States concerned may well bane r4rained 
from proclaiming the amendments to their Acts which would have outlawed
"pies", because they are doubtful of their ability to police the 
legislation on it was in force. There would, quite clearly, be 
considerable policing difficulties, and I would sympathise with anyone 
charged with this responeibility.
           e you could imagine, it would be very difficult to prevent
buyers øttin together to get into some form of agreement over a 
particular lot of wool, and it is also very difficult indeed to prevent 
lot o litting. It is quite true, it would be possible to prevent brokers 
from invoicing wool out to anyone other than the original buyer, but that 
would not prevent the original buyer splitting wool up after he had taken
delivery of it. It would , however, mean that the wool would have to 
be handled twice.
           An effective ban on the operation of "pies" would have to have
elaborate provisions to control the movement and ownership of wool after 
it had left the same brokers' otoress This raises the question as to 
how far legislation could be taken without infringing the rights of a 
person to dispose of a commodity that he has purchased. These are matters 
which the States would have to settle if they were determined to put down 
the operation of "pies".
            Although "pies" are important, and the appropriate 
authorities should do what they can to make their operation impossible, 
we should not be led to the conclusion that "pies" represent one of the 
major problems confronting the wool industry.
            A member of the Australian National University has written 
a paper in which he claims that "pies" do not affect the price that 
growers get by as much as 1%. Indeed, be tries to say that it is only 
1/10th of IA.
             Mr. Justice Cook himself said that it was not possible to 
measure accurately how far "pies" would affect the price that growers
would get, but the suggestion is that the operation of "pies" was

                                     WO

 not a major and significant factor in determining the price that we 
 get for our wool. Overseas economic conditions play a fur more 
 important part in determining the price of wool. It is quite true 
 that an auction system tende to exaggerate the rises and the 
 depressions in price, but it is also true that world conditiens over- 
 seas are the determining factor.
               I woul like very briefly to quote one or two figures 
 to support this point of view. Up to and preceding the depre.bion 
of wool prices of 14 months ago, the constion of wool in the major 
countries fell by 160 million pounds weight on a clean basis. The 
price of wool followed the downward trend by falling from 81 pence
to 46 pence over eighteen months to two year. t the same time, 
unemployment in the west Riding wool textile area of the United 
Kingdom rose from an average of 200 or 300 to 3,000.
               As a general rule, when the textile industry overseas 
is doing well, we find the Australian grower getting a reasonable 
return at a rasonable price, but if the textile industry is having 
to put off workers, and if it is working at short time, only thre 
or four days a week, if it can't sell its finished cloth - as was the 
ease eighteen months ago, then we find that we get a very bad price 
for our wool.
                The wool industry may be able to devise arrangements 
that would, to some extent, insulate growers from these overseas trends, 
but we should never forget that the main factor determining price is 
the level of demand in major consuming countries, One of the most 
important tasks of the sort of Committee I've earlier suggested the 
Wool Industry should ask the Althorn'. Government to establish would be 
to decide how far arrangements inside Australia could be made to 
give the grower a more stable price.

