<!--start metadata-->
Title: Development of Northern Australia
Description: radio talk
Date: 29/09/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       The map of Australia's north and of its`more remote fastnesses
is changing: where a few short years ago there were just empty spaces, 
today there are the marks of the cartographer boldly indicating places 
like Weipa, Mt Goldsworthy and Kambalda. The reason is the dramatic 
minerals boom getting under way in this country, and also the projects 
designed to develop water resources for expansion of agriculture and 
beef pastures. Iron, nickel, manganese, bauxite ... a sense of excite- 
ment seems to surround the very sound of the words today as spectacular, 
multi-million dollar projects, undreamed of a little while back, are on 
the move in that vast sweep of Australia's north and the north-west.
       Now new modern mining towns are springing up, whole new
railways are being driven through semi-desert, ports have been 
gouged out and modern new wharves built. Great ore ships call at 
remote points of the vast coast from Japan and other countries. 
Giant freight trains hauling loads up to 20,000 tons of ore thunder 
across undeveloped lands. Future projections talk of the establish- 
ment of major new industrial complexes. Truly, that former
'slumbering giant' the North is on the move.
       The scope of this tremendous upsurge in development was
underlined recently by an Official visit by the Prime Minister, 
Mr Gorton, the Minister for National Development, Mr Fairbairn, and 
party. This round-Australia fact-finding and ,"amiliarisation tour 
earlier this month enabled the Prime Minister to inspect a large number 
of projects at first hand. He returned greatly impressed. Starting 
from Sydney the Prime Minister's aircraft flew to Gladstone(Central 
Queensland) and then visited the following places .. Emerald, Mt Isa, 
Weipa, Groote Eylandt, Gove, Melville Island, Darwin, the Ord scheme, 
Port Hedland, Dampier, Mt. Tom Price, Kalgoorlie, Kambalda, and then 
return to Canberra.
       The route followed took in more than one-third of the main
high-grade bauxite deposits in the world and mountains of iron ore 
totalling more than 15,000 million tons. It covered iron ore projects 
on which organisations are spending or committed to investing more than 
$600 million.The developments will increase Australia's export earnings, 
about 70% of which still come from sales of rural products. In the 
last financial year, earnings from mineral exports totalled about 
$485 million. It is estimated that next financial year it is likely to 
rise to more than $650 million and then climb to around $1000 million 
by the early 1970's. By about 1975, exports of iron ore alone should
        t'.a~ ''250 million a year, representing about 30% of all/ _.

               -2-
earnings from mineral exports.  .
    At Gladstone the party inspected the new modern wharf 
facilities taking 50,000 ton ships and handling coal, pyrites, grain, 
bauxite, and alumina.
    The Commonwealth, under the Coal Loading Works Agreement 
(Queensland) Act 1962 provided $400,000 towards the total estimated cost 
of improvements to coal loading facilities at the port. Of this aid, 
half was by way of grant and half by way of loan.
    New life has been injected into Gladstone by the establishment 
of the Alumina Plant, operated by Queensland Alumina Limited, an 
international consortium of four partners. The plant, which cost 
about $115 million, produces alumina from Weipa bauxite. Output 
capacity which began at 600,000 long tons of aluinina a year, is 
being expanded to 900,000 tons.
    The visitors inspected the big coal deposits in the Central 
Queensland region where production is under way in five separate areas, 
and new ones are expected to come into production soon. Utah 
Construction and Mining Co. Ltd., which has a special coal lease 
in the Blackwater district, has built a railway spur, begun an 
open-cut mine and commenced exporting coking coal to Japanese steel 
interests. Utah has announced it will develop the Goonyella field, 
which includes a township for 500, and a new 120 mile rail spur 
costing $33 million.
   The party saw the brigalow land development scheme, in which
12 million acres have been cleared of dense scrub to open up new
lands for beef cattle and sorghum. The Commonwealth has made avail-
able $23 million in loans to the Queensland Government for building of
roads and property development.
   Work on the network of beef roads in Queensland stemmed from
a decision in 1961 when the Commonwealth made available finance to the
Queensland Government for construction of about 1000 miles of these roads.
A new seven year program announced in 1967 provides for work to be
undertaken on roads totalling about 1500 miles as well as completing
the 1000 miles of the original program. Total Commonwealth aid on this
project; more than $51 million in grants, more than $81 million in
loans.                            /3

            -3-

    There was the Emerald Irrigation Project to see,
 providing for a water storage with a 6300 square-mile catchment 
 area on the Nogoa River. The Commonwealth agreed to supply funds 
 with a maximum of $20 million as a non-repayable grant under the 
 National Water Resources Development Program for this project.
   The party called at Mt. Isa where Mt Isa Mines Ltçl began 
 an expansion program in 1956 which by 1967 had cost $130 million 
 and increased ore-treatment capacity to 16,000 tons a day. The 
 Commonwealth has been involved here also, providing advances totalling 
 $34.5 million to be repaid by Queensland over 20 years - for 
 re-construction of the Mt. Isa-Townsville rail line.
   At Weipa was seen the exciting development of this rich 
 bauxite field where reserves are estimated to be at least 2000 
 million tons. The, Queensland Government in 1957 granted a lease 
 to Comalco Industries Pty. Ltd., jointly owned by Kaiser Aluminium 
 and Chemical Corporation of the U.S.A. (50%) and Conzinc Riotinto 
 of Australia (50%). At Weipa there is a port where none existed a 
 few years ago. There's a growing township. The company plans to 
 lift production of bauxite to more than 4.2 million tons in 1969, 
 about half of which will be for treatment in Australian plants and the 
 rest overseas.
   The aircraft flew over the prawn-rich Gulf of Carpentaria to 
 Groote Eylandt on the gulf's western side where the Prime Minister 
 inspected development of Australia's largest known deposits of 
 manganese ore. In this project B.H.P. had invested $13-14 million, 
 including spending on the plant and township to the end of 1967.
   The aircraft then made a short hop to the Gove Peninsula, 
 where the big bauxite-alumina project is operated by Nabalco, jointly 
 owned by a consortium of Australian companies and Alusuisse, a large 
 European aluminium producer. The proposal requires Nabalco to 
 establish a 500,000 tons a year alumina plant by December 31, 1971.
   From Darwin, the next hop was to Kununurra, the administrative 
 and commercial centre of the Ord Irrigation Project. Here 31 farms, 
mainly growing cotton, are irrigated from the diversion dam built 
as Stage One, and to which the Commonwealth contributed more than 
$12 million. The Commonwealth will contribute $48 million (comprising 
a non-repayable grant of $21 million for the construction of the dam 
and an interest-bearing loan for the irrigation works) for construction 
of the main dam and the development of a further 150,000 acres.

           -4—


   Mr Gorton's party also inspected Kimberley Research Station,
a joint Commonwealth—State research centre where experiments are going
on into crop prospects and beef cattle raising. In the W.A. beef
roads scheme, Commonwealth grants between 1961 and 1967 :totalled
$17.9 million for about 1300 miles of roads.
   From the Ord, the party flew across the great shoulder of the
vast North—West to Port Hedland, one of the two outlets for the tremend-
ous Pilbara iron ore deposits. Using or intending to use Port Hedland
are five mining companies, including Goldsworthy Mining Pty. Ltd and
Mt Newman Mining Ltd.,.
   The Goldsworthymine is 70 miles to the east, where the two main
ore bodies contain between 40 and 50 million tons of direct— 
shipping ore. The company's commitments to the Western Australian
Government include the spending of not less than $40 million on
mining, transportation and wharf facilities to enable shipment
at the rate of one million tons a year, and there are further long—term
commitments. The company has big ore contracts with Japan, totalling
more than $258 million.
   The Mt. Newman lease, 250 miles south of Port Hedland, has a
major ore body with reported inferred reserves of more than 1000 million
tons of high—grade ore --- which makes it one of the largest single deposits
of this ore in the world. The company's agreement with the Western
Australian Government calls for the minimum expenditure of $156 million,
firstly for export of ore, then upgrading of ore before export, and
finally for steel—making. The company is committed to submitting a scheme
for secondary processing by 1979, and a proposal by 1992 for the
establishment of an $80 million integrated iron and steel industry,
capable ultimately of producing one million tons of steel a year The
company has a 265 mile railway line under construction between the major
ore body at Mt. Whaleback and Port Hedland: estimated cost $40-50
million. Trains of up to 135 freight cars, carrying 12,000 tons of
ore loaded in less than one hour, will operate on the line.
   The Mt. Newman consortium has an initial 15 year contract with
Japanese steel—making mills for the supply of more than 100 million
tons of iron ore.
   The next leg of the journey, to Dampier, opened the way for
a visit to Mt Tom Price, Hamersley Iron Pty. Ltd.'s 'mountain of iron ore'.
                              /5

.w





               —5—

     Owners are Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Pty. Ltd (54%) and Kaiser 
     Steel Corporation (U.S.) 36%, and a direct Australian shareholding 
     of 10%.Hamersley holds estimated reserves of some 3000 millicn tons 
     in the area, with Mt Tom Price the main ore body containing an 
     estimated 500 million tons of high grade ore, ranking with Whaleback 
     as one of the richest single deposits of its type.
        The fourth stage of a series of future commitments entered 
     into with the Western Australian Government by the company is for 
     the submission of plans, within 20 years of commencing exports of 
      ore, for an integrated iron and steel industry, requiring investment 
      of at least $80 million. The Hamersley pellet plant, commissioned 
      in March this year to produce two million tons of pellets annually, 
      is the largest single unit of its kind in the world. The ore is 
      carried from Mt Tom Price in trains which carry up to 20,000 tons 
      a journey over a 182 mile rail link to Dampier, the shipment port 
      which will provide access for carriers up to 100,000 tons taking the
      ore to Japan.
         The Prime Minister and his party then left on the long flight 
      over a vast stretch of Western Australia to Kalgoorlie, the gold 
      city. About 30 miles south of Kalgoorlie is Kambalda, site of 
      new nickel ore and sulphide discoveries. Western Mining Corpor- 
      ation has signed direct contracts with Japanese buyers for
      delivery of 40,000 tons of nickel concentrates over a ten year 
      period valued at $68 million, as well as other contracts. This 
      year the company signed an agreement with the Western Australian 
      Government to erect a nickel refinery at Kwinana, with an annual 
      capacity of at least 15,000 tons,and scheduled to begin production 
      in 1970. A new town is to be built costing $5 million and with an 
      estimated population of 2500 by before the end of 1970.
         On his return to Canberra, the Prime Minister was asked in 
      Parliament to take 'effective measures to reverse the trend towards 
      foreign control of our assets...".
         He replied, 'On the recent tour ... it was very pleasant to see 
      the number of developments which were entirely Australian—owned, such 
      as the Western Mining Corporation Ltd. development and the number 
      of other developments which were either 50% or 60% Australian-owned; 
      though there were some where one would have liked to have seen more 
      Australian ownership .. much more."

