<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation - wool research
Description: press statement
Date: 8/03/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT      March 8th, 1959
       C.S.I.R.O. d001, RESEARCH
      Today I'm going to write about wool research.
      You may remember seeing some time ago a report in a 
Melbourne paper that the Royal Adelaide Hospital, after conducting 
enquiries of its own, decid d that it should replace all its woollen 
blankets with cotton tufted blankets. The reasons for this were 
that the Hospital authorities felt that woollen fibres carried 
disease from ward to ward and from one bed to another. They felt 
that cotton fibres did not carry germs in anything like the same 
quantity.
      C.S.I.R.O. immediately began research into this 
matter because quite clearly if this view came to be commonly held 
throughout hospitals, it would have a serious effect on the demand 
for woollen goods and could even influence some people against 
buying woollen clothing.
      I am happy to be able to say that our Research 
Organization seems to have the situation well in hand. 
Investigations in this field have been given very high priority 
in the last few months.
      In the last few weeks laboratory and laundry trials 
have been completed in collaboration with the Royal Melbourne 
Hospital. These trials suggest that the C.S.I.R.O. have now found 
a satisfactory method of washing and sterilizing all wool hospital 
blankete. C.S.I.R.O. recommend the use of all wool blankets
instead of wool cotton union blankets on the grounds that they have 
higher resistence to abrasion and it is easier to remove stains 
from them.
       They recommend also that they should be made
shrink resistant so that they may withstand repeated washing. In 
the tests that have been held so far blankets have withstood up 
to forty washings and sterilizations by boiling in a special 
detergent mixture evolved by C.S.I.R.O.

              2.
      This process reduces the dangerof disease carried by
wool fibres to a negligible level.
      Showing the thoroughness with which they always
carry out their work, C.S.I.R.O. also took a sample of air from
hospital wards to analyse what kind of fibres were being carried
into the air, whether they were cotton, wool or some other substance.
       The analysis showed that 96% of the fibres were cotton
or some form of cellulose. This shows clearly that only a very
small percentage of the fibres in the air could come from woollen
materials.
       The C.S.I.R.O. trials and experiments in this
matter have not yet been fully completed, but if later hospital
trials confirm present findings, C.S.I.R.O. methods will be
published in Australia and overseas with the co-operation of the
Australian Wool Bureau and of the International Wool Secretariat.
       As I implied earlier these findings are of the
utmost importance to the wool industry because if there had been
valid reasons for thinking that woollen blankets carried disease
and germs more than materials of other types, it would have dealt
a damaging blow to the Industry.
       While I am talking about wool there are one or
two other developments which may be of interest.
       As you know C.S.I.R.O. evolved a process for
permanent creasing woollen fabrics and this has been of greatest
benefit for men's trousers and possibly also for women's skirts.
       B: ever, there has been one drawback. I understand
that the plant required is relatively expensive and that there are
many small manufacturers who could not stand the cost of such a
plant without increasing the price of their product beyond the
capacity of the market and customers they normally supply.
        I feel it should be possible for some central
organization, perhaps under the auspices of the Wool Bureau to
establish a central plant where small manufacturers of trousers
or of skirts could have their product permanently creased. The
cost involved per garment on the great bulk of products would be
very small.
        It is true that Fletcher Jones, who are

               3.
undoubtedly the leading trouser manufacturers in Australia, have 
installed their own permanent creasing plant but Fletcher Jones 
has a very lart,e turnover and a very large output .,nd thus their 
initiative and enterprise in this field cannot be so easily followed 
by smaller manufctizers who perhaps supply a difierent mrrket 
from that of Fletcher Jones.
       Last week the Minister in Charge of C.S.I.R,O., 
Mr. Casey, told me that he would bring the question of unwanted 
shine on woollen suits to the notice of his officers. The 
C.S.I.R.O. have not, as yet, done a great deal of work on this 
problem, but I feel that if this defect in woollen fabrics could 
be overcome that wools competitive advantage over synthetick, 
would be greatly enlinced.

