<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam, foreign policy
Description: electoral talk
Date: 13/04/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO ELECTORAL TALK Sunday 13 April 1975


       THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER



The Ministerial statement which the Prime Minister made in 
parliament this week was restricted and defensive. It was 
entirely negative in its approach to a problem about which 
Australia should be looking to the future.

The problem of IndoChina is not who was right in 1965 or what
Lord Casey said 21 years ago, the problem is one of human 
misery - the misery of the refugees who are fleeing the
Northern armies and of the children abandoned because of the 
war or made orphans by the actions of both sides.

Until the Opposition sent its own mission to Indo-China, the 
Andrew Peacock/Ian Sinclair mission, the government ignored 
the plight of these people.

Two Ministers appeared to welcome the advance of the
victorious. Northern armies and the government refused even to 
allow an aircraft taking children from South Vietnam to another 
country to use Australia as a staging point.

I would like to contrast this government's stance with its 
attitude to Chile where there was an open-ended agreement to accept 
refugees - a committment which raises the question whether the 
government take one view about left wing refugees from a right 
wing regime and another different and unsympathetic approach 
towards refugees from communist armies.

In parliament this week I put forward a positive programme for 
the Australian government as an alternative to inaction and to 
their barely concealed opinion of some members of the government 
that the sooner all of South Vietnam has been overrun the better.

I believe the Australian government should make an approach through 
the embassy it has opened in Hanoi to North Vietnam to try and 
persuade that country to agree to a ceasefire.

The government should ask North Vietnam to allow the International 
Red Cross and the International Red Crescent into those parts of 
South Vietnam that are now occupied by their forces and those of 
the Provisional Revolutionary Government.

They should also allow the United Nations to send Inspection teams 
into the occupied parts of the South.

I called on the government to approach the Soviet Union and China, 
where Australia has also an Embassy since the Labor Government 
came to office, to ask them fo use their influence to secure 
observance of the Paris Agreements which in January 1973 secured 
an all too brief cease-fire. Both sides In Vietnam have been 
accused of breaching the Paris Accords, but what has happened in 
South Vietnam in the last few weeks has indicated quite plainly 
that the overwhelming weight of these breaches have been carried 
out by the North Vietnam and the Soviet Union.

              - 2 -


I also called on the government to approach other countries 
to help build up pressure on North Vietnam to observe the
Paris cease-fire agreement and to permit the introduction into 
areas they control of the Red Cross and the United Nations.

There is an urgent need to provide aid for the people of South 
Vietnam both in the areas still under the control of the Saigon 
government and in the areas now under the control of the North 
Vietnamese.

That aid should be supervised by international or United
Nations agencies to ensure that it gets into the appropriate hands,

These are positive. Similar positive action that could and should 
be taken is the expansion of aid in the form of food, clothing and 
medical supplies, and if necessary on the basis of consultation 
with the government of South Vietnam we should be prepared to 
take some thousands of refugees, adults or children.

These measures would ease the suffering of the South Vietnamese. 
They will make retribution in the territories occupied by the 
North Vietnamese more difficult.

After this is done the government needs to examine the long term 
implications of the now globally wide-spread political instability,

What is happening in South Vietnam must have its impact on
opinions in the United States where the pressures for isolationism 
will be intensified.

Australia must remain dedicated to supporting the crucial
American committment to the deterrant which constitutes the world's 
fundamental guarantee against a Third and perhaps final world war,

