<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Prime Ministers
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 21/07/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                            311A 21/7/57
                      ION     F DIE !MISTERS3YB 24/7/57
                By: Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.
              The British Cemmonwealth of Nations is not jut ax empty phas 
  or a polite term to end the British Empire. On the contrary it sontains 
  the substance and heart of matters that can with wisdom and foresight 
  lead to 4 more permanent peace in this unsettled world.
              The old Empire contained Australia, hew Zealand, South Africa 
  and Canada ss se3fagoverning Domlnione.'anglandts many colonies were 
  governed from the British Colonial Office not because there was any wish 
  to deny them complete self-govesnment but because they had not reached the 
  state of economic development rind political stability that makes democratic
  self governaent posEitle.
             Since the last world war the old British Empire and Cemaonwea 
 has even way to the great new Britieh Commonwealth of Netions. In 
 addition to the old pertnersothere are now many completely new self- 
 governing Dominions. This is not the result of any startling new policy, 
 it is the result of careful and thoughtful policies beg= many years ago 
 and that could only show result after long year of hard work end patient 
 effort. India, iakistan an Ceylon are three great new self-governing 
 Dominions whose loaders attend the irlme Miniature' Conference as equal 
 partners with cur own irime Liniatea. Ghana, once the Cold Conet of Africa 
 ana now the youngest Dominionothe newest partner in the British Common- 
 wealth was also represented and on 31st August of tale year the Federation 
 of relays will also receive full Dominion BLUDUB In tae not too distant 
 future we may also expect to see the Central African Federation, end the
 Federation of the West Indies become full partners in the Commonwealth. 
            The Commonwealth arime Ninisteas meet, they exchauca views, 
discus differences,and no one of taem by virtue of position is leader - 
 ell are equal. Their ooWiquea do not aay very much lit the close of 
conferences but tais-would help to encourage frankneas aaongat the different 
leaders. 7vhen they have agreement th.ta. is recorded when they agree to - 
differ they unddrstand each other's point of view', This much is also 
important because when we look at the coaposition or the British Cemnon- 
wealth we must realise that there can be few great problamn in the world 
that are not also found within the Coamonwealth. l'erhapa the difference 
between the world and the Commonwealth is that quietly an unheralded the 
Commonwenith is doing much to solve those problems.

               he British Common         th e        re b
people th-      te, there is a strong poasibility that there will be
more ble& rime aníeters than mite at future couter nc$s. 
Australis. ::e:w aland, üuth !trice, Canada and .ingland white. Ìzzdie,
fakistan, Crcyl     Ghana, the Federation of Lsl.aya bleck and t her.: are
 sure to    now ae itiQns of coloured people from Africa and W®st
 Indies.     Re     en etives of nearly every roca are found as equal
 partner s within the Commoawcs;lth. Religious diffarena€s within. the 
 Commonwealth are as great as thus+e in any other part of the world,
 think of lndia, f$i`istan and Xasheair. respite those vest differences 
 the leaders of these different peoples meet in London ta seems their 
 problems and their difficulties. They aoet a.s equals as mambers of 
 one Commonwealth, being completely independent and yet having some
 bond of unity difficult to describe.     On some thinek they arreae, on 
 others they differ, but this is only to be expected when the 
 differences in raoe, re?.igioxx und beiclegeouz are t_i..on into account.
            Lee very feet thsit, being :o different, they moot the way 
      do as zslembars of the nri ::ish Cc,meonweel th of Lutions is a lesson 
       - res+, of the world.
            The Bri tiSh CQiamonss+ealth         ° hou different peop3e ss,
 despite great problews between Weave, can got pa together to the
 adver. tee.e of ouch me:mber. If the Cocssrokwoalth can also z how the 
 world how thee c: f?robl.etaW on be solved, it rsf.l], Leve g1.:Ven the world 
 zi- gift Leon) vtx?taable tha:._ the gift of rclf-goverrxmen.t-: to the once 
 colonial members of the new British Comronwenith .


 17/7/1057.

