<!--start metadata-->
Title: Gough Whitlam's homework
Description: Press release
Date: 29/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS RELEASE

MALCOLM FRASER 29 MARCH, 1967

GOUGH H ITLAM' S HOMEWORK

   Recently Gough Whitlam strongly attacked the 
present Government about Commonwealth Health Services. 
After the attack a good deal of the sting in what the 
Leader of the Opposition had said was removed when 
Dr. Forbes, Minister for Health showed that Mr. Whitlam 
had either been very badly informed or had been very 
careless in his handling of the facts.

   It is important that the true position should 
be known. The Opposition was so annoyed when Dr. Forbes 
was trying to remedy the situation and they tried to 
prevent him getting his points across by seven times 
raising points of order and by moving that the Minister 
be no longer heard. These tactics highlighted public 
attention on the fact that Dr. Forbes was challenging the 
accuracy and the reliability of a new Labor Leader. 
However let me get down to the actual position.
   Gough Whitlam said there were 191 separate Health 
Funds in Australia, with separate administration and 
overhead expenses. He implied that this was an expensive 
and inefficient way of providing benefits.
   The Minister pointed out that the Act requires each 
Hospital and Medical Fund to be registered separately but 
most funds carry on both businesses. This cuts the number
                      /2

         -2-

 of Funds by half. In addition a large number of
 small funds are run for the employees of particular
 firms or for the people of a particular district based 
 on a local hospital. These funds are subsidised by the 
 company or organisation responsible. However, five funds 
 cover 72% of all the people insured for hospital and 
 medical benefits in Australia. This gives the public a 
 reasonable choice and in my view is certainly much better 
 than compelling all people into one Government Fund which 
 Mr. Whitlam would seem to prefer.

    The next point made by the Leader of the Opposition 
 concerned the management cost of this fund as a percentage 
 of contributions. He compared this with the administration 
 and costs of the Taxation Department, as a percentage of 
 tax collections. It was pointed out that this is quite an 
unrealistic comparison e.g. if the cost of income tax 
 collections are 10% of tax collected, the percentage cost 
could be halved by doubling the tax collected. On the other 
hand if hospital benefits devoted 5% of their collections 
to overheads and through their own efficiency would be able 
to reduce their scale of contributions by half then admini- 
stration costs would immediately become 10% of their 
collections. The comparison made by the Leader of the 
Opposition was quite unfair and inaccurate.
   Health expenditure in Australia was compared with 
that in the United Kingdom but in doing this Mr. Whitlam 
took only the National Health expenditure in the United 
Kingdom and comparied this with all expenditure on health
                        /3

          -3-

 in Australia by State, local authorities, by private 
 persons as well as by the Commonwealth. If all the 
 other United Kingdom health expenses were compared 
 on a proper basis the story would be different from 
 the one in which we were led to believe.

    Another point that Mr. Whitlam made concerned 
 the rapid increase in rate of contributions between 
 1960 and 1966, but again he made unrealistic comparisons. 
 He compared the rate of contributions of a public ward 
 bed in 1960, the lowest rate, with the contribution for 
 a private ward bed in 1966 at the highest rate.
    It took 25 to 30 minutes of question time for 
 Dr. Forbes to be able to make his points but I think 
 in the end the message got through.

   Statistics can be used in many ways by many 
 different people but when matters of some national 
 significance are being put forward by national leaders 
 there is an obligation to see that the matter is properly 
 represented and that the facts are not distorted to win 
 some debating trick.

   I do not know if in making these mistakes Gough 
 Whitlam did so merely because his homework had not been 
 sufficiently well prepared or whether the errors were in 
 fact made because it helped in an attack on the Health 
 scheme. In either case this kind of debating is just not 
good enough.

