<!--start metadata-->
Title: Russian spy ring, education, strikes
Description: Radio talk
Date: 3/10/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK                         3HA HAMILTON SUNDAY 3RD OCT.
                                            THURSDAY 7TH OCT.

        In the last few days we have seen many reports in 
the press concerning the Russian spy ring in the United 
Kingdom. We have been told that over 100 Russians have been 
told to leave Britain. We have not been told many details. 
There have been suggestions that this was industrial spying 
linked with the Concorde. Most of the world has been left 
in a good deal of ignorance about the activities of the Soviet 
spies expelled from Britain. There have been some reports that 
the Soviet Union would retaliate and would expel a certain 
number of British diplomats from the Soviet Union. At the 
moment there has been no confirmation that this would in fact 
be put into practice. We have been left with the impression 
that despite the moves to bring the different parts of the 
world closer together, the relentless pursuit of national 
interests goes on as much as it has ever done. I think these 
reports have attracted a good deal less attention than would 
have been the case several years ago. Some people seem to have 
the view that spying is an accepted activity of the great 
powers, and if you are caught out, it doesn't really matter all
that much. This is an odd view. If we wish to bring the world 
closer together, if we wish to establish the circumstances in 
which the Soviet powers and in which the western democratic world 
can come closer together, we need to build some kind of world of 
trust and co-operation. The Russian activities and the British 
decisions concerning the spy ring indicates that this trust does 
not really exist.

         In recent times, the Senate has established a specialist 
committee to look into education. In particular the Senate is 
looking at the training of teachers and the number of teacher 
trainees who will go out into the State schools of Australia to 
improve the quality of teaching. Some people have suggested that 
the Commonwealth is not concerned with these matters. This is 
very far from the truth. The Commonwealth is engaged in finance 
program to provide an additional 14,000 teacher trainee places in 
State teachers colleges or in colleges of advanced education. 
The program will cost over $60 million. We know that the provision 
of an adequate number of dedicated teachers has an important

                2


     bearing on the quality of teaching in Australia. These 
     programs were in fact ones that I introduced when I was 
     Minister for Education about two years ago. The pupil 
     teacher ratios in primary schools and in secondary schools 
     have been steadily improving. It would improve much faster 
     if all those who entered the teaching services of the States 
     and if those who accepted teacher training scholarships in 
     the States remained in the profession. The wastage from 
     those in training and from those in teaching is one of the 
     significant factors which needs attention from all the State 
     authorities. If this problem could be overcome, the pupil: 
     teacher ratios and the shortage of teachers in particular 
•    subjects would be overcome much more quickly. It is a problem 
     that is important and which will need the attention of all the 
     State authorities and of the Commonwealth in the next few 
     months and years.


          In recent times, people in both primary and secondary 
     industry have become very concerned about inflation. They have 
     become concerned at the rate at which wage rates have increased, 
     adding to costs and making it difficult for many industries to 
     maintain a viable position. This is shown by the fact that in 
     the three years up to 1970, average weekly earnings increased 
     by about 7% but in the period since then they have increased 
     by over 11%. This shows marked increases in wages in many areas. 
•    Increased wages are only going to help workers in different 
     industries if they can buy more goods and services as a result. 
     If the increased wages are only going to add to costs and add to 
     the price of goods and services, then the wage earner will be no 
     better off and the community will be faced with a higher wage 
     structure and, as a result of that, the export industries will 
     be in a much more difficult position. This whole position is 
     made much worse by the strikes that have occurred in a number of 
     industries in recent times. One of the responsible Sydney 
     newspapers had a major article a day or two ago headed 'Industrial 
     Anarchy'. Is this the grim shape of new things to come? The 
     article said that Sydney is looking back at one of the worst 
     weeks in modern Australian industrial history. The article said 
     that in sections of industry, a handful of strikers had
     succeeded in introducing a state of anarchy. It asked, what is 
     the future of industrial relations? It pointed out that a

                3


     handful of militant unionists had held the community to 
     ransom. I was in fact in Sydney when many transport workers 
     were on strike and as a result the roads were blocked, people 
     trying to use private transport had clogged the main access 
     roads to the city and it took much longer than it should to 
     get to or from work. The press report said that the Cabinet 
     was holding a crisis meeting but that in fact the ordinary 
     man in the street had reacted most violently to the disruption 
     and turmoil. According to one Sydney newspaper, somebody said 
      'I have been a unionist for 30 years, but this is the last 
     straw. I am writing to Bob Hawke telling him that I am quitting'. 
     The newspaper suggested that scores of unionists were supporting 
     this view because they have become alarmed at the number of 
     wildcat strikes. The press report said that + million communters 
     were stranded because of a strike of guards. Half the building 
     workers were stood down because of another strike. The mail 
     exchange was stopped because one man walked out. This sort of 
     activity cannot continue if Australia is to continue to provide 
     rising standards of living for its people. Unions and union 
     leaders needed to use the power that they undoubtedly had with 
     responsibility. It was legitimate to do what they could to 
     increase the standards of their own union members but wage claims 
     pressed too high and strikes for political purpose would do nothing 
     but disrupt the economic life of many people of Australia and make 
     it difficult to maintain the government's objectives of full 
•    employment and the rising standard of living. Above all else, 
     we need to understand that a high standard of living in Australia 
     and adequate government provision for the less well off, for the 
     poorer people in the community, for the old and the sick, 
     depended on the willingness of everyone to work for a better
     Australia. Unnecessary strikes and industrial difficulty made 
     it difficult to achieve this kind of objective. Increased wages,
     not matched by increased productivity made it difficult for many 
     industries, especially for the rural industries, which had to sell
     their product on overseas markets. Many people in the cities
     pressed their own sectional claims without regard for their wider
     consequences in Australia. Unless people are prepared to look at
     the total consequences of their actions, the general progress and
     prosperity of Australia will be threatened.

