<!--start metadata-->
Title: Year in review, foreign policy, Vietnam
Description: radio talk
Date: c1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


By Mr Malcolm Fraser, member for Wannon and Minister for Education
           and Science
    The year has almost ended and this will be my last broadcast
for 1968 until Parliament resumes in February. For many Australians
it has been a year of recovery -- a good season in Western Victoria
and better wool-prices are now having a significant impact over many
rural areas. Unfortunately the marketing situation affecting dairy
products overseas remains very difficult. The beef industry sustained
a shock earlier in the year whn quotas were imposed on all countries
exporting to the United States. There was a momentary impact on prices,
which however, recovered and have been sustained at good levels in the
weeks since.
    With the new Prime Minister at the helm it is quite natural there
should be a good deal of public debate about the effectiveness of the
Government and its record under Mr Gorton. The Opposition aimed much
of its criticism at the new Prime Minister in an unsuccessful attempt
to cause difficulties for the Prime Minister.
    Their tactics came to a head in the want-of-confidence motion
moved in the dying hours of the last Parliament. It is not my judgment
but rather the general judgment of the Press Gallery and of other
observers that the want-of-confidence motion failed dismally, that the
Leader of the Opposition did not seem to have his heart in the attack
and the Members behind him went off in many different directions. As a
result they made no impact that was able to serve their own purpose.
    It is my personal and strong belief that the Prime Minister
has finished the year in very good position. There is a tremendous
difference between being a Minister and being Prime Minister, and
although Senator Gorton as he was had had a very considerable experience
in handling affairs of many different portfolios in the Senate and as
a Cabinet minister, it is still a very large step for any man to take.

              2.
It is the most difficult job that Australia can provide, and any 
person who attempts it needs not only a great deal of physical
stamina, but a courage `nd a dedication of which only a few people 
are capable.
    The Prime Minister in particular has shown that he wants 
to look to new horizons in social welfare -- in looking after the 
aged and the sick, and those people in the community who need some 
additional help. I will mention in a few moments some matters 
introduced in the Budget as a result of an initial examination of 
these problems. The Welfare Committee of Cabinet which the Prime 
Minister established is making a full and comprehensive review of 
these matters.
    A year ago many people supported John Gorton for Prime 
Minister because they believed he had the capacity and qualities for 
leadership and also because they believed he would be the best person 
to stand in the Parliamentary arena against Mr Whitlam, who in the 
previous year had begun to develop a not inconsiderable reputation. 
The faith of supporters of Senator Gorton for the Prime Ministership 
has been fully justified. Over the year he has slowly consolidated and 
strengthened his position and his authority in Parliament.
    In contrast, Mr Whitlam, who a year ago appeared to shine, 
has lost a little of his glamour in the Parliamentary arena, and no 
doubt this is not only due to the nature of Mr Gorton's Prime 
Ministership but also to the difficulties which seem to be inherent in 
the problems confronting any leader of the present Opposition. There 
is only need to mention Jim Cairns' challenge to his leadership 
earlier in the year, which seemed to be something of a watershed for 
Gough Whitlam. He has not shown the same buoyancy and spirit which he 
had exhibited before this event.

                3.

     People might well expect members of the Liberal Party and 
of the Country Party, as politicians, to be joyful about the problems 
and the political disarray which the formerly great Australian Labour 
Party has so often displayed in recent times. On the contrary, I
think most of us look on these problems as Australians. We recognise 
that the national cause is not best served by having a strong Government 
and a very weak Opposition. It would be best served by having a strong 
Government and a strong and viable Opposition, which can prompt and 
probe and question with skill. It is an unhappy commentary on 
Australian politics that such an Opposition has not exsited for a great 
number of years.
     There were a number of problems which the Government had to 
face during the year. There were some significant international issues, 
in which Australia is only a small observer of the scene and without 
the power and resources to be much more. There was the invasion of 
Czechoslovakia by Russia and her Warsaw Pact allies, an invasion which 
surely caused many people to question the somewhat hopeful view that a 
number of people had been beginning to take of Russia and her long-term 
objectives.
     Throughout the course of this year we have seen President 
Johnson working to achieve peace in Vietnam. We have the bombing pause 
and the negotiations in Paris. But much as we all fervently want peace 
we cannot expect a quick or easy solution to these problems. The pattern 
of Communist negotiation in Korea should be remembered. If my
information is correct the Communists there first called for negotiations 
when they were militarily exhausted and weak, and when further arrogance 
and defiance might have led to an overwelming defeat. Once negotiations 
were established and the level of fighting reduced they re-built their 
military strength, and at leater times at the negotiating table they were
in a position to co-ordinate their military policies and their negotiating

                                          4.

 tactics to their advantage.
             The North Vietnamese have suffered immense casualties over 
 this year. The infamous Tet Offensive did not give them the success 
 they had envisaged, did not reveal the support in South Vietnam that 
 they had expected. Their casualties were enormous and have
 continued to be heavy. But if they follow the Korean pattern they 
 will be re-building their military strength and they will dovetail 
 their military activities with the come-and-go of negotiations in 
•Paris.      Vietnam is still a testing time for a kind of aggression- 
 by-subversion which the North has practised. We need always to 
 remember this is only one of the many small countries in South-East 
 Asia w'dch is susceptible to this kind of subversion.
             In more recent times there is the French currency crisis 
 which left, at least for the present, the Australian financial scene 
 pretty well untouched.
             It is not possible to say what long-term effects overseas 
 currency crises might have on the Australian scene. But it is of very 
 real importance to all the free world that the major countries try to 
 establish a situation in which these recurring crises are avoided, and 
 I believe that the manner in which other countries have responded and 
 reacted to the French situation shows that other countries are doubly 
 conscious of this need.
             Earlier in the year the Prime Minister himself expounded the 
 new objectives for the aged, the sick and the needy. No nation, he 
 said, could be great unless it sought to take care of the weaker, the 
 aged and the ill within it. In the Budget came the first results of the 
 Government's "new look" programme - guaranteed hospital benefits for 
 the chronically ill, extended nursing home benefits and more help for 
 handicapped children. In addition, the Government is co-operating with

                 5.

the States to promote the development of co—ordinated home—care programmes.
During the year a Committee of Inquiry under Mr Justice Nimmo was
established to review operations of the health insurance scheme.
     Finally, I would like to mention another 1968 Government
decision which has far—reaching implications for Australia's future.
This is the decision to move into the foreign shipping trade by
chartering two vessels within shipping conferences for the carriage
of imports and exports on the Australia—U.K—Europe and the Australia— 
North America routes. While this thould result in considerable savings
of foreign exchange, probably the greatest benefits will come initially
from the flow of vital shipping intelligence from inside the conferences
in this period of revolutionary chEnge in world shipping.
     I wish everyone a Happy Christmas and a prosperous New Year.

