<!--start metadata-->
Title: Minister opens annual army exercise
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 13/08/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR PRESS                 NO. 4981
         MINISTER OPENS ANNUAL ARMY EXERCISE
        Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
          the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.

    The following is the text of an opening address given today by the 
Minister for the Army, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, to senior Australian and 
overseas service and Government Department officers to mark the 
commencement of the annual Army Chief of General Staff exercise.
    The exercise is being held at the Royal Military College, Duntroon, 
until August 17 and provides an opportunity for an exchange of ideas and an 
exchange of techniques and knowledge between serving members of several
armies.

    Overseas visitors to the exercise include officers from the 
United Kingdom, British Far East Command, the United States, Canada and
New Zealand.

    Also attending is the Commander, Australian Force Vietnam and the 
Còmmander, Australian Army Force in Malaysia.

    In his opening address the Minister for the Army said:
    "I would again like to thank the Chief of the General Staff for 
giving me the opportunity of making some opening remarks at this :'Exercise. 

On behalf of the Government in particular I welcome our visitors from the 
British Army who have come from the United Kingdom and the Far East, our 
visitors from the US Army and Marine Corps who have come from both the 

United States and from Vietnam. I would also like to welcome our visitors 
from New Zealand and Canada whom we are always more than pleased to see in
Australia.
Operations in Vietnam 

    Task Force:

    As you know I have recently returned from a visit to Vietnam. As 
one would expect I found the morale of our troops very high. They are 

continuing to perform a most useful role, The changeover in the Task Force 
is now complete and the new force has settled in well. We are particularly 
pleased to have the New Zealand Company operating with us, in addition to 
the New Zealand Battery. This is by no means the first time that 

Austral_= .end New Zealand troops h _ve fought toy-.ether in the aiAe ;onflict,

                2.
In Vietnam, members of both our forces are maintaining the highest 
tradition which the name "Anzac" always implies.
    Although fighting in the Phuoc Tuy Province has been relatively 
quiet in recent months, except for the current outbreak; nobody, can 
foretell what the future might bring. In recent times the enemy has 
reinforced his troops•in the north, in the central highlands and there 
are now suggestions that Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces in the 
Third Corps Zone will also be strengthened. Of course, over this period 
the enemy has been able to introduce many modern and sophisticated 
weapons into his Army. Thus, it is quite possible that the Viet Cong and 
North Vietnamese may decide once again to challenge our domination of 
the Phuoc Tuy province. If they do so decide , major clashes can be 
expected.
    Meanwhile we have pushed the enemy forces away from the main 
centres of population and reasonable security prevails for 80 - 90% 
of the people in the Province although there can be no guarantee that 
incidents will not occur in any area.
    During the past year, the interdependence of the RAAF and the 
Army has been emphasised in training and the effects of this have shown 
up in operations.
    Every few weeks I read complimentary remarks made about the good
work done by RAAF Iroquois and Caribou crews in Vietnam. Mutual 
understanding is a vital element to success in operations and I look 
forward to seeing this co-operation and mutual reliance permeate 
throughout all levels of both Services wherever they may be operating.
    Civic Action:
    Increasing security has given greater opportunities for civic 
action to be carried out. Very much as a result of experience gained
over the last year a Civil Affairs Unit of nearly 50 men has been sent
to Vietnam. This new Unit is settling in well and its relationship 
with the province officials and the villagers is good. It will be
co-operating actively with the Revolutionary Development Teams and
other authorities who are working to lift the standard of life of the 
South Vietnamese people.

                 3.
     Ib should be remembered that Army civic action is largely
 restricted to the immediate things which can provide c.rIsistance,
 the things which we have always taken for granted in Australia but
 which are sorely needed in Vietnam. The more long-term projects are
 the province of Colombo Plan and SEATO aid programmes and of the
 South Vietnamese themselves.
     Australian Army Traininp' Team Vietnam
     I must mention members of the Australian Army Training Team
 Vietnam who are fighting under difficult and arduous conditions in
 the northern provinces. I visited several members of the team on
 location and also spoke with members of Revolutionary Development Teams
 who were working in villages in areas that were quite unsafe a few
 months ago. While the North Vietnamese buildup in this area has undoubtedly
 slowed the progress of the Free World Forces it has not stopped their
 progress, as I was able to see for myself.
    There now seems to be a better understanding of the manner in 
 which the Revolutionary Development Teams, the popular forces, the 
 regional forces, the regular Army of the Republic of Vietnam units and 
 other Free Workd Forces all fit in the Vietnam effort. Certainly better 
security is being provided for the Revolutionary Development Teams.
    Whe_,ever I went I met the highest praise for members of the 
Australian Army Training Team who, in many senses, are the unsung 
heroes of the Vietnam war so far as Australia is concerned, because they 
operate out of the public eye and we do not often hear of them. For 
its size, this band is extremely highly decorated.
    Since June 1964 the following awards for gallantry have been made
to this team:
    1 VC 
    1 DSO
    1 OBE
   2 MBE
   3 MC
   5 DCM (1 with bar)
   4 MM
                          4 

                                         4.
         3 BEM
         5 MID
         4 QC
         Efforts by the South Vietnamese people:
         In Australia Australians are most concerned to read about 
what our own people are doing in Vietnam and in the Unites States I 
would imagine the average American is concerned to read of the US 
exploits. I think this is natural but it does lead to a misunderstanding 
at times of what I regard as the very real and worthwhile effort
being made by the South Vietnamese on their own behalf. Too often 
we have heard the cry which I believe is quite unjust, that the South 
Vietnamese are not doing anything for themselves. It needs to be 
remembered, that up till early 1965 the South Vietnamese were getting 
no combat support. Up to this time their Regular Army Units were being 
very severely attacked and were suffering enormous casualties, casualties 
of akind that would destroy the morale of any Army. For many years 
the deliberate Viet Cong objective has been to assassinate anyone who 
could become a leader in the military or civil field in South Vietnam 
and thus, great numbers of their skilled, trained personnel have been
killed in one way or another.        Under these circumstances, it is no
wonder that the South Vietnamese Army became short on experience.
Since early 1965, however, I believe a good deal cf this situation
has been retrieved. Certainly, the quality of their units is uneven but
to suggest that they are not doing what can be done to help themselves, as
is too often the case, ignores the great efforts that they have made.
Many of their units are now fighting extraordinarily well. There are
many isolated instances of heroism. I can recall in our own area an
occasion on which a popular force platoon in an entrenched position held
off a Viet Cong battalion for a considerable time, inflicting heavy
damage on the enemy until relief from the Task Force arrived. If it had
been an Australian platoon that had been so attacked we might well
have justifiably described it as one of the heroic events in Australian
military history, but this action went unnoticed.
         In more general terms, major units of the Army of the republic
of Vietnr.m Forces often fight wsil and r_...r;1. An Army of i.},: <eco~yw';;lic

                                5.
 of Vietnam Division in the north has had a continuous record of 
 victories against the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese. It has bees 
 on operations for 28 days out of every month in this year and has 
 conducted more than 90 operations of battalion size or larger in its 
 own right over the same period. I do not like the score-board method 
 of indicating victory but this Division has killed over 5000 North 
 Vietnamese and Viet Cong by body count for the loss of about 1000 of its 
 own men. This is a great record and one of which any Division would be
 justifiably proud.  I wish there were some way in which there could 
 be a greater public understanding in the United States and Australia 
 of this effort.
        On the political front they have also made considerable 
 advances. Without any of the traditional British background for 
 democratic Government, while their country has been beset by war and 
 insurgency, they have made notable moves on the road to representative 
 Government, The final Eteps have yet to be taken but the indications I 
 was able to get in Vietnam suggest that the elections would be fair and
 reasonaLle.
        '.)uring the year I have met many people who thought that the 
 effort to establish representative Government before greater security 
 had been achieved was a vain waste of time. So far these doubters 
 have been proved wrong and we must hope that they will be conclusively 
 proved wrong in the forthcoming elections. It is worth remembering, 
 in talking of elections in South Vietnam, that the United Kingdom, faced 
 with the threat of invasion, suspended democracy during the last World 
 War by the agreement of all political parties. In contrast, the South 
Vietnamese, fighting desperately within their own borders., are
attempting to introduce and make effective the normal institutions of 
a peace-time democracy.
The Army in Australia 
       Over the last year the National Service intake into the Army 
has reached a steady state and regular recruiting has moved forward 
quite strongly, and is continuing well. I have said before that we
now n .v_. t'_ rot :ctive       farce that 

                 6.
 except for periods in the first or second world wars. This has only been 
 achieved by the hard work and dedication of all members of the
 Regular Army and because of the manner in which National Servicemen have 
 accepted their obligations. It is an integrated Army. It is an Army 
 of which all its members and Australia can and should be proud.
     This expansion has occurred not without effort and not without 
 cost, but whatever the cost it has tot been allowed to detract from 
 the standard of training for the field force units. A great compliment 
 was paid the Army this year when General Freeman, of the United States 
 Continental Command, visited this country to make a personal inspection 
 of our training establishments and methods. The expansion has placed a 
 special strain on the number of skilled officers and non-commissioned 
 officers. Much of their skill can Only be learnt be experience and so 
 there is a gap 4ere that will take some time to overcome. However, 
 increased entries to the Officer Cadet School at Portsea and the Officer 
 Training Unit at Scheyville have done a great deal to expand the number 
 of junior officers in the Army.
    In the past the backbone of the I 'irmy has been the band of 
 officers trained to the highest possible professional standards at the 
 Royal Military College, Duntroon. In recent years Duntroon has not 
 attracted the number of recruits that would enable it to fulfill this 
 task. We have been giving particular attention to this over this year. 
 The final agreements for affiliation with the University of N.S.IAT have 
 now been reached and I would like to pay a tribute to the spirit of 
 co-operation and to the assistance we have had from the University of N.S.W 
 authorities. Now, as you know, graduates from future intakes into the
Royal Military College will be able to receive Bachelor degrees in Arts 
or Science in the Faculty of Military Studies. There are already some
indications that this is improving the numbers applying for entry to
the Collegç.
    I cannot believe that the Royal Military College is not able to 
attract more than a sufficient number of young men of the calibre it 
requires. A few weeks ago I had extensive discussions with a small 
,Troup of he^_.zmasters to see where we were falling clown in our appoal

                                   7.
 for applicants to the College and to see what steps can and should be 
 taken to make entry to the College more appealing to the high quality 
 young men we seek to attract. These discussions were useful and in the 
 near future I hope that agreement will be reached on a number of steps 
 that we can take to help achieve our objective.
          In this regard, there are some ancient myths that need to be
 dispelled. It is often said that an army career can only be a short 
 term one; that there is no security of tenure from the time of entry to 
 the normal age of retirement at 60 or 65. This is of course true for 
 many officers but it is also true that in most cases the experience 
 gained in the Army makes it possible for retiring officers to gain 
 first class jobs in a variety of civilian fields. And now that it is 
 possible for their military experience to be backed by a rectognised 
 degree these possibilities can only be widened.
         In any case the difference between a career in the Army and one
 in other large scale enterprises is not as wide as it is often depicted. 
 With company takeovers, changes in management and changes in technology, 
 most people find that the nature of their job changes from time to time, 
 And how many people work for the same company or organisation all their 
 life? For that matter there is more security in the Army than in a good 
 many kinds of private employment where changing business fortunes can 
 quite dramatically alter the course of a man's career.
Manpower
         The increase in the size of the Army has brought a number of
difficulties with it which are new to the Astralian Army. I have
already indicated the strains in skilled officer and non-commissioned
officer fields. But the growth in the Army has resulted in much greater 
posting turbulence. Men are moved around more often than was once the 
case. They are away from their family for longer periods of time. Now 
that the rapid rush of expansion has concluded it is our objective to make 
improvements in a. number of these fields.
        But there are many factors which increase the Army's problems 
For the first time we have 2100 people entering and leaving the Army
every three months. Yor the firsttim      vo   .,i,°nl~-zc-ant - - ~-~~.~rti::.n

                                       ^ 
                                       U.










  of the J,rmy, about 40%, on a short term two-year basis. 
                                                               This means




  that it is much more difficult than it once was to have every person in





  the Army in the most advantageous position at each and every point of 





  time.





           Other matters complicate posting arrangements. A close watch 





 must be kept on the numbers of National Servicemen serving in operational 





 units. Experienced officers and non-commissioned officers and soldiers 





 need to be rotated through the training organisations and we need to make 





 provision for the maximum numbers of members of the permanent Army to gain 





 operational experience. Not least, we have to provide for a proper rest 





 and recreation period for members who have served overseas in the theatre 





 of war. These are all problems that have,Town out of the present situation





 and they are all problems that complicate man management to a marked 





 degree.





           ';'/e also recognise that there is a marked difference between what 





 can be demanded of an Army the size of ours when the rest of the 





 country is at peace and what can be demanded of the same Army when the 





 whole nation is mobilised for war. During general war it is accepted 





 that soldiers may be away from Australia in the theatre of conflict 





 for years at a time and that in these circumstances individuals will 





 willingly make sacrifices and endure hardship. However, in situations 





 such as that which exists at present, when the rest of the country is 





 largely untouched by the war, it would be unreasonable to expect the 





soldier to undergo the rigours that would be demanded of him during





general mobilisation. He has his family to think of and the natural 





desire to lead as normal a life as possible. Thus, periods of service 





overseas must be arranged so that a soldier is assured of spending a 





reasonaje amount of time at home between tours of duty. If we do not do 





this the effect on recruitment and re-engagemiut rates would be felt





very strongly and this would obviously have serious implications for the 




Army.






         However, there are other factors that mitigate this situation.




 or the .-, r cy, sS j c.. 
                                /6,T:         'í?ï1t100

                               9.
  on new building programmes, establishing permanent brick accommodation 

  so that many of the old tin sheds of the past can be knocked down. 

  Permanent accommodation for about 9000 members of the field force at 

  Holsworthy, Enoggera, Puckapunyal, Swanbourne and Townsville has been 
  or will be completed over the next year. We still have problems of
  overcrowding and lack of suitbale accommodation but these are 
  gradually being overcome.

         Since the 1964/65 building programme began about 1400 married 
  quarters have been handed over to the Army and about 1100 more will be 
  completed in the near future. This should grealty ease the problem of
  homes for soldiers who are moved from one posting to another. 
  Conclusion

         In summary the Army has a year of achievement behind it, 
 achievement of which all Hustralians are I think rightly proud. The 
 seady state of National Service will give us some opportunity to 

 consolidate the position that has been won but I can see additional 
 challenges ahead. The advance made in Vietnam must be consolidated 

 and improved and there will be no immediate redurotion in the pressure 
 that is being placed on the skilled manpower within the Army.

         I know very well that members of the Army recognise the 

 importance of the role it is playing for- •' 1<= cecur ty of .'iustralia 

 and that whatever is asked of it in the future will be performed 

 willingly and efficiently. On behalf of the Government I would like to 
 express my warm appreciation to the whole Army for what has been achieved 
 over the past year, and'to wish you gentlemen a successful and
 valuable week.




                                      Lists: A,B and C
                                      Further information:
13 August 1967              CANBERRA: Major E. Ross-Smith
                                      (65-4061) (86-1138)
                        OTHER STATES: A'DPR AT COMM ^AND HEADQUARTERS

