<!--start metadata-->
Title: "Kangaroo control"
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 7/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   SENT TO ELECTORAL PAPERS AND GORDON FREETH 
        D.J.O. 7/3/67


 FOR PRESS                   No. 4793

            "KANGAROO CONTROL"
   Probably the most crowded aircraft in the world are those over 
South Vietnam.
   Thousands of aircraft are in the air at all times, carrying out 
thousands of missions.
   And because the war h-.s no "fronts", artillery shells and mortar 
bombs flash through the same airplanes, in every quarter of the country.
   Thus, for the first time in history it has become necessary to 
introduce a large-scale system to ensure that aircraft and bombs do not 
collide.
   In the 1st Australian Task Force's tactical area of responsibility 
the airways are made safe by a tiny office known as "Kangaroo Control'.
   This office, also known as an aircraft warning centre, is run by 
Warrant Officer Class Two Colin Campbell, of Oxley, Brisbane.
   Explaining his job, WO2 Campbell said: "Briefly, we see that an 
aircraft and an artillery shell do not use the same slice of air."
   And to ensure this does not happen, WO Campbell's men are on the 
job 24 hours a day.
  There is no margin for error. One slip could mean the loss of 
valuable aircraft and everyone on board.
  WO Campbell and his men are members of the 161st Air Reconnais.3ance 
Flight, whose tiny 'possum" aircraft put their safety in the hands of 
"Kangaroo Control" daily.
  "The job is simple enough," said WO Campbell. "Any aircraft 
entering the 'Kangaroo Control' area immediately notifies us by radio.
  "We tell the crows where the artillery or mortars are firing,
giving the base position, the target area and estimated maximum altitude 
the shells will reach.
  "We then recommend to the pilot a safe passage through the area." 
  He went on: "Our radio system works two ways. As well as keeping
in touch with the aircraft, we must always have a line to the artillery 
command posts.
  "They let us know where they want to fire their shells, and we 
immediately pass on the information to all aircraft in the area.
  "When we are certain no planes are in the way of shells, we give 
the artillery the green light.
  "You can imagine how high pressure the men's job becomes when the 
artillery is firing in support of an infantry unit, and dozens of
aircraft must get into the area for trooplifts, medical evacuations 
and resupply missions.
  "The shells and planes fly thick and fast at these times, and the 
men must work fast, hard, and without making a single slip-up," he said.
  Soldiers working on NO Campbell's team include Bombardier Frank 
Donnelly, of Adelaide; Corporal Gordon Frause, of Brisbane; Sergeant


                            /2

i


                                     -2-

      Jack Jewell, of Inala, Brisbane; Private Errol Potter, of Oxley, 
      Brisbane; and Private Barry 'Wallace, of Wangaratta, Victoria.
          They are always on the job - maintaining contact between aircrews 
      and artillery, and plotting aircraft and target positions.
          Although they rarely leave their tiny office at Nui Dat, theirs is
      among the most responsible of tasks handled by Australian soldiers in 
      Vietnam.




                                       Lists: A

                                       Further information:

                            CANBERRA:  Major Allan S. Hinds (65-4061) (49-6030)
                        OTHER STATES:  ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS


      7 March, 1967.

      Directorate of Public Relations, 
      Army Headquarters, 
      CANBERRA. A.C.T.

