<!--start metadata-->
Title: Merino rams export ban eased
Description: press statement
Date: 1/04/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                        Lro/A,,0-4Akg,„y. I. 4-.69

I, PRESS STATEMENT
   By the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P., Minister 
   for Education and Science and Member for Wannon.



                    MERINO RAMS: EXPORT BAN EASED
             The 40 year-old ban on the export of Merino rams has been
   eased - with stringent safeguards.
             The Government acted after considering recommendations
   by the Australian Wool Industry Conference, which resolved to seek
   a partial lifting of the ban by 37 votes to 16.
             In the past the export ban has been maintained, I believe,
   because of fears that -
             . A relaxation of the ban might lead to much higher 
               Merino ram prices in Australia.
             . If overseas countries were able to improve and expand 
               wool production then they would be more competitive 
               with Australian wool and might force down prices on world 
               markets.
             The latter fear has no validity in the context of the present
   world market situation for wool.
             The export safeguards laid down should minimise the
   possibility of increased ram prices.
             Any concern held by growers should be allayed by these
   safeguards.
             For instance, in the first year, permission will be given
   for no more than 300 rams to be exported and this will be reviewed by
   the Australian Wool Industry Conference.
             Export approvals will be issued only for rams sold at public
   auction and at sales nominated by state member associations of the
   Australian Association of Stud Merino Breeders.
             The export of Merino ewes and of semen and fertilised
   Merino ova will be prohibited.
             The Australian Wool Board believes there are a number of
   factors which will inhibit the demand for Australian rams, and the
   Board does not envisage a sudden or substantial rise in overseas demand
   for them.

•
               —2—


          A large number of countries now no longer wish to 
    produce a purely wool—growing sheep and the U.S. in particular has 
    been concentrating on dual purpose animals.
          The limit of 300 rams for the first year is seen in 
    perspective against the number of rams sold and unsold in Australia 
    in 1967.
          In that year nearly 202,000 rams were sold, while just 
    short of 295,000 were unsold. At the end of the year, more than 432,000 
    ram lambs were on hand.
          If we take present annual production as 400,000 rams, the 
    300 represents only .07%.
          The Australian Wool Board in its report discussed the 
    question that if wool from other countries was improved by imported 
    Australian merino rams, would the world market for good merino type 
    apparel wool be over supplied?
          The Board quoted the International Wool Secretariat which 
    reported that apparel wool production was growing at the slow rate 
    of .7% a year, compared with world population growth of 1.8%.
          As a result of this and a high rate of increase in man 
    made fibre production, wool's share of the textile and apparel fibre 
    market over 20 years has fallen from 13.5% to 8.5%.
          The export of merino rams, resulting in a world increase 
    in the production of good quality apparel wool, could well act as a 
    counter to this growing competition from synthetics.
          One of the things that destroys wool's image more than any 
    other factor is the amount of poor quality wool that comes onto the 
    markets in many other countries.
          The volume of this poor wool being marketed should be 
    reduced as a result of the export of merino rams, and wool's general 
    image should be improved.
          As a result of this, the gradual decline in world demand 
    for wool as compared to synthetics may well be reduced.

