<!--start metadata-->
Title: Liberal Party Federal Council, education expenses, super-phosphate, Mr Whitlam, arbitration
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 20/10/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                        Embargo: 6000 p.m.
ELECTORAL STATEMENT         Sunday, Oct. 20
         THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 
               RADIO TALK

Liberal Party Federal Council.

During this last week a number of things have been happening. Over the 
weekend the Liberal Party Federal met to endorse a new Liberal Party 
platform.

It is imaginative. It looks to the future. There was some vigorous de- 
bate over its acceptance, and all of this is healthy.

In my own area I strongly support secret ballots in union elections and 
that is firm policy for the parliamentary party.

The underlying theme of the whole platform is to emphasise the role of 
the individual in society and the maintenance of individuals' right of 
choice.

Education Expenses

One of the more unhappy aspects of the Federal budget was the government's 
decision to cut education expenses allowable for taxation purposes from 
$400 to $150,

While Mr Whitlam was overseas Caucus made a decision that they would have 
that budget item reversed because they realise how much it would harm 
many people. When Mr Whitlam returned from overseas he said in a press 
conference that he supported $150 and that $400 was not justifiable. In. 
supporting his view Mr Whitlam said: "I sometimes wonder who my colleagues 
believe elected a Labour government, who they think a Labour government 
should have first in mind,00"

Mr Whitlam also said that statistics showed that the deduction claimed 
for students only exceeded $150 a year for those parents whose income was 
$10,000 or more.

This is just not true. Official income statistics from the Bureau of 
Statistics indicates that for the last year in which these detailed fig- 
ures are available, 1967/68, slightly over 124,000 people claimed the 
maximum allowance. Of these 4700% had incomes of less than $6,000. That 
shows very plainly that many people with modest incomes were paying out a 
good deal for the education of their children.

I doubt very much if they will appreciate Mr Whitlam's attitude and his 
determination to lay his job on the line over the issue. That was the 
only way he could compell Caucus to back down. This provision hits many 
people who send children to private schools and to government schools.

                                20
 Super-phosphate

While he was acting Prime Minister Dr Cairns said bluntly that the Prime 
Minister had mishandled the super-phosphate issue. He let some people 
believe that the government's decision to throw out the bounty should 
be reviewed, although he drew back from that position after he was 
criticised by his colleagues.

In case there is any remaining doubts amongst farmers, the Prime Minister 
re-affirmed his stance that the abolition of the bounty must stand. 
Farmers certainly know where they are with this government. By June 1975 
costs will have doubled over a three year period and the gross income is 
likely to be half of last year. The Prime Minister seems to be entirely 
unaware of these circumstances. He still seems to believe farmers have 
never had it so goods

Mr Whitlam Overseas

Mr Whitlam has just come back from overseas - he is going overseas again 
for a trip that will last, I think, 52 days. Many of his other ministers 
have also been overseas with great regularity. I would have thought that 
under present circumstances the Prime Minister would have regarded his 
first obligation would be in regard to Australia.

Many people are in difficulty. He is rapidly giving people in Canberra 
the view that he is wanting to travel the world as Prime Minister before 
he is dismissed from the jobs At the moment there is little doubt that 
a majority of people would want to do just that.

The Opposition pressed the Prime Minister to give a report of his trip in 
the parliament. He spoke about his visit to Williamsburg and Niagra Falls 
in answer to the question. He said how valuable the trip had been to him 
but he refused to commit himself to making a report to the nation.

I can remember in other times when Prime Ministers or Foreign Ministers 
returned from overseas, one of their immediate tasks was to report to 
the nation on what had occurred during their visits overseas. It was 
always a significant parliamentary event,

The Prime Minister is not vastly concerned, it appears, with letting 
Australia know what he is doing or in reporting to the parliament.

I had earlier suggested that there were two things of the utmost importance 
that the Prime Minister should have done in this last trip, Let me ex- 
plain the background.

Because of the rise in oil prices from which Australia has been insulated 
so far, the Middle East is drawing off the liquid resources of the west- 
ern world at the rate of one billion dollars a week. Those reserves total. 
about $170,000,000. Under present circumstances they will be gone in two
                              .../3

                                 30

and a half years. This is creating an increasing difficulty in financing 
world trade. The economies of European countries, Japan, America are in 
great difficulty. If we are not careful we will see recession in many 
countries coupled with a real down turn in world trade causing worldwide 
hardship.

In addition to this the same drawing off of reserves to the Middle East 
is making it much harder to find development capital. I have been told, 
for example, that there were once 400 banks around the world in which 
large sums of developmental capital could be safely placed. I am advised 
that that number has been reduced to about 20.

These two matters could create enormous difficulties throughout the wes- 
tern trading world. Major trading countries should take initiatives in 
relation to that before a crisis develops and not after it has occurred, 
leaving wide-spread difficulty in its wake. Mr Whitlam ignored both 
subjects on his recent visit overseas.

Arbitration Legislation

Mr Cameron, the Minister for Labour, brought in another Bill to change 
the Arbitration Act in Australia. The subject matter of the Bill is a 
complicated legal one involving the organisations of unions.

A difficult situation has arisen concerning the legality of a number of 
unions because they have to be incorporated in both the state and Federal 
jurisdiction in at least four states. If the proposed Commonwealth leg- 
islation is to be effective, significant state legislation would be re- 
quired in N.S.W., Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia, and 
unions themselves would have to be willing to participate.

They would in effect have to sign a deed and lodge it with the Industrial 
Registrar and in that deed they would have to say they would be prepared 
to pay any fine or penalty imposed on the union as a result of state 
industrial determinations.

For the Opposition I urged that the legislation ought to be deferred until 
Mr Cameron had adequately consulted the states, so that we could know 
whether or not they would play their part and also until Mr Cameron had 
told us whether or not the trade unions would be prepared to sign the 
proposed deed.

I doubt very much if some of the prominent and significant unions, like 
the B.L.F. or the A.M.W.U. would be prepared to do that. Mr Cameron, 
therefore, ran the risk of introducing legislation that will be abortive 
because he has not been prepared to have adequate consultation and nego- 
tiation with the unions and state governments before pressing ahead.

