<!--start metadata-->
Title: The dairying industry
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 9/06/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                     3Ha - 9th June 
                                                     3YB - 12th June
                        THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY
                 By Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon



       The Dairying Industry is important to Australia. There are about
70,000 odd dairy farms throughout Australia upon which large sections of
the Australian community are dependent for their own well-being. Also 
each Australian consumes just under 30 lbs. of butter each per year.

       For several years a subsidy has been paid the Dairy Industry, and 
by the end of June, over £112 million will have been paid the Industry
in this way.  Although the subsidy quite clearly benefits the Industry 
itself, it is also a consumer subsidy because it enables you to buy your
butter well below its actual cost of production. The saving to consumers 
is about 7d. a lb. at the present time.

       The Government guarantee the farmer the cost of production (as 
fixed by an independent committee) on all the butter and cheese consumed
in Australia, plus 20% of that figure exported. Over the last five 
years, something between 70% and_ 80% of total butter production has been 
guaranteed.

       Throughout the period of stabilisation, the Government has been 
unwilling to guarantee total production for the simple reason that more . 
high cost producers would be drawn to the Industry. This would put up 
average costs for the Industry and at the same time add very greatly to 
the butter that must be sold overseas on an extremely unprofitable export
market.   These two things would mean that either an increasing sum would 
have to be paid in subsidy each year, or that the local price would have
to rise to cover higher costs of production.  Both these trends should
be resisted.  The U.S.A. has got into considerable difficulties with 
her farm-support programme, under which total production has been guar-
anteed.   She has found herself with enormous surpluses with no really
satisfactory way of getting rid of them.  In some instances her surpluses 
have been reduced by infringing upon Australia's traditional markets.

       Over the last five years, total production has risen from about
160,000 tons to 200,000 tons of butter.  Local consumption has only
risen from 110,000 to 118,000 tons.  This means that while production 
increases at the present rate, a greater proportion of butter is being
sold on the unprofitable export market.  This of course lowers the
average return to farmers.  It is also worth noting that over the last 
five years, total income of dairy farmers throughout the Commonwealth has
gone up 17% under the expiring Stabilisation Scheme. Victoria's income 
is up from £25 million to £38 million, reflecting an increase in produc- 
tion of 60,000 to 90,000 tons which is nearly half the Commonwealth total
production.   As a result of this, very nearly half the Commonwealth 
subsidy finds it way to Victoria.

       Under the new stabilisation plan, there are three new provisions
that should help the Industry.  The Minister has indicated he will 
accept a constant figure of productivity for finding the cost of effic-
ient production.  This will give efficient farmers the benefit of their
own increased production.  Furthermore, on the advice of the Industry 
and with the approval of the Minister, the Dairying Industry Stabilisation
Fund will be made available for research and sales promotion.  Also, 
the Minister has already said the subsidy will not be reduced in the 
coming year.

       I hope the Dairying Industry regard the new plan as an improve-
ment on the one that it will supersede.  Nevertheless, I believe the

x


                                         2.


      Government, together with the Industry's leaders, should come to a
      decision regarding the future position of the Industry in the Australian 
      economy.

             While the Industry sells a considerable proportion of its pro- 
      duction on an unprofitable export market, it can never be entirely
      independent and free from Government help.   In reality it means the 
      Government is subsidising the sale of butter overseas below cost of
      production to earn overseas funds.   In large measure, this is the 
      present position, but I don't really believe it is a satisfactory one.

             If possible, the Industry should be independent and free from
      Government subsidy.   This can only come if costs can be reduced and if 
      a larger share of total production could be consumed on the local market. 
      Governments, both State and T'ederal, are not doing as much as they could 
      to help achieve this.

             Work is beginning in sales promotion and in the sale of milk
      products in forms other than butter and cheese.   This is only part of
     _the problem.    There should be active co-operation regarding soldier
      and closer settlement between the Commonwealth and the States.  It is 
      true for instance that Victoria has some of the best dairying country, 
      but if more dairy farms are developed, is that going to help the Industry 
      as a whole, when it only means that more products must be sold overseas
      on an unprofitable basis?   I don't think so.  Furthermore, I believe 
      many farms are short of capital for development work that could lower
      cost of production.   Developmental capital has in recent times been in
      short supply to most sections of primary producers.   This could not be 
      more wrong when we consider they are our only really great export indus- 
      tries.

             Regarding the Dairying Industry in particular, it is quite possible 
      that high cost producers in other States would be better off producing and 
      exporting some other form of primary commodity which they can do at an
      economical level.    If this was proved to be so, then Government help 
      would be needed in converting their production into the new channels.

             I believe these last few thoughts contain suggestions that could 
      help the Industry become independent and free of Government subsidy. 
      I would be very happy to discuss them with any dairy farmer, branch or 
       organisa ion, if they so wish.

