<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary practice, financial committees, committee on tariffs
Description: press statement
Date: 17/10/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMNT :

NALCOLM FRASER :

                                                    October l7th,1965


                      PARLIAT4ENTARY PRACTICE


             In this last week the Parliament began the detailed examination
of the Estimates. In these discussions the financial provisions for each 
Government Department are taken one by one and are open to full discussion.

             The first matter to come under review was the estimates for 
Parliament itself and this year there was a more than usually interesting 
debate. Several members have been devoting their attention to the ways in 
which Parliament ftself can be made a more effective instrument. In the years 
since the war the power and the influence of the Government has greatly expanded 
simply because a modern State requires a Government to do many more things 
than was the case some years ago. Thus, the Government services have expanded 
and the technical and expert advice available to Governments have, as one might 
expect, kept pace with this development.

             If the private member of Parliament is to be able to criticise 
and to advise and to scrutinise as effectively as possible, he needs additional 
facilities so that he can keep pace with the increasing demands of Parliamentary 
work. This is important because our system is largely one of checks and 
balances. In many cases members of Parliament are watch dogs over the 
Executive. Parliamentary control is exertfd by influence rather than direct 
power, by advice rather than command, by sensible criticism rather than 
destruction, by scrutiny as opposed to initiation and by publicity compared 
to secrecy. If a private member is to carry out these functions in a proper 
Nanner he needs to have a wide knowledge and a good understanding of what
 overnments are doing and what they are trying to do in many particular fields.

             In the United Kingdom the House of Commons has come up against 
this problem in a much more severe fashion than we have because in Britain 
the House of Commons is responsible not only for all those things whicr are 
managed by our Federal Parliament but also for all those matters which are 
now the responsibility of our States. Thus the pressure on the time of the 
House of Commons has been enormous. The House of Commons has, therefore, 
developed a system of Committees which enable the House to get through a great
deal more work. Bills are sent to certain committees for the committee stage 
and there are special committees whose task is to scrutinise and examine
various aspects of administration. The House of Commons has always turned 
its back firmly against committees which might have a responsibility to one 
particular department and have, instead, supported the establishment of 
committees that have wide responsibilities which cover certain aspects of the
work of several departments. They have also turned their back against
committees that could criticise or discuss Government policy but have supported 
committees which would examine and scrutinise the implementation of established 
policy.

             When you examine the nature of our Government and our 
Parliamentary system these rules and procedures appear to be sound. Over 
the last winter recess I made a detailed examination of British and of 
Australian practice and I believe that there is an area in which we could 
borrow from British experience.





                                                             /2

                                  2
FINANCIAL COMMITTEES
          Both Parliaments already have certain committees in common. 
In the financial field we have a Public Accounts Committee whose purpose 
is to see that monies have been spent as Parliament ordered. Both 
Parliaments have committees to see that delegated legislation does not
impinge upon the rights of individuals. In the House of Commons you will 
also find a Committee on the Estimates whose purpose is to see that an 
established policy is being carried out as efficiently as possible, whose 
purpose is to see that the taxpayer is getting proper value for each pound
spent.    The Estimates Committee provides a valuable adjunct to the work 
performed by the Public Accounts Committee in the United Kingdom.
          Thus, the United Kingdom has one committee whose job it is to 
see that money has been spent as Parliament ordered and nother whose purpose 
is to see that Governments' policies are being wisely and economically 
implemented.
           I believe that Australia, with great advantage, could borrow on 
United Kingdom experience and establish an Estimates Committee.













                                                               /3

                                 3
A COMMITTEE ON TARIFFS
           There is another field suggested purely from our own experience 
in which we could extend the work of Parliamentary committees. At the 
moment Tariff Board Reports come into our Parliament, a few interested
members discuss them, and that is the end of the matter. These RepOrts 
and the Governments action as a result of them are of immense importance
to the economy.     They affect the fortunes and livelihoods of industries
and individuals.  These Reports could be referred to a Joint Committee of 
the Parliament to Make a detailed examination of them and then this Report 
would come to the full Parliament.
           The purpose of the Parliamentary Committee would not be to perform 
the Tariff Board's work over again but to do two things; firstly to see that 
the Tariff Board adopted standard principles and practices in each case that
came before it.   If there were deviations from the standards the Board 
should be persuaded to make its reasons plainly known and the Parliament
would be able to discuss them.   Secondly, the Committee would le able to 
examine Government action as a result of the reports to see that there was 
consistency in Government decisions in relation to Tariff Board Reports. If 
there was no consistency in these matters there may well be good reasons for 
it but it is right and proper that Parliament should be informed of it. 
And so, I believe, we should establish a Parliamentary Committee on the 
tariffs to perform these tasks.
           Through the course of time tie numbers of our Parliament will grow 
and their duties will multiply, thus it will become more important to devise 
ways and means by which our members can be better armed to fill their own
duties as private members of Parliament. The two Committees I have 
suggested and about which I spoke on the Estimates of the Parliament would 
help in this direction.

