<!--start metadata-->
Title: United States visit by Prime Minister
Description: press statement
Date: c1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT

                                   U.S. VISIT BY PRIME MINISTER: FRESH UNDERSTANDINGS
             By Mr Malcolm Fraser, Minister for Education and Science and Member    for Wannon

                                   Fresh understandings in Australian-American relationships 
emerged from the recent visit of the Prime Minister, Mr Gorton to the
United States.
                                   The Prime Minister's discussions with President Nixon
and top Administration advisers led 'Loa re-statement of the spirit of
the ties between our two countries.These new bonds come at a time when we are entering a new
era in our region - an era in which Australia has pledged to stand by 
her Asian neighbours in the face of the British military withdrawal
by 1971.                           This decision - to maintain military forces in the Malaysia-
Singapore area and give additional aid - drew praise from the new
American President.
                                   The Prime Minister, in his report to Parliament on 15 May,
said President Nixon had publicly and privately backed, supported and
applauded the Australian decision. He said the U.S. shared the Australian objectives of
advancing development and security in the region and encouraging
regional co-operation.             President Nixon's view had been that it was the purpose
and determination of the U.S. to continue to participate in the 
Pacific and to strengthen the forces of freedom and progress in Asia.
                                   The Prime Minister referred in Parliament to the ANZUS 
Treaty as perhaps the strongest guarantee of Australia's future 
  security against physical attack.                                                                                                                       /2

          -2—

      Anzus, the security pact between Australia, New Zealand and
the U.S. was signed in 1951.
      The Prime Minister returned with major assurances from the
newly installed President Nixon on the continuing force of the
provisions of this Treaty.
      President Nixon and his Administration, he said, had
strongly underlined the importance and significance they attached to
the Treaty.
      The President had said in a public statement that
Australia and the United States could both be proud of the
contribution we were making as partners to the security and progress
of the Pacific region.
      Mr Gorton saw in the attitude adopted by the President
a strong and unambiguous re—affirmation of the application of the Anzus
Treaty.
      He saw it as noteworthy that a President newly in office
should re—affirm in such strong terms the importance of the Treaty.
      The Prime Minister emphasised that the Treaty, which is so
much to our advantage, also imposed obligations on Australia.
      It provided that Australia should co—operate in the
establishment of installations to assist our joint defence potential.
      In this, Mr Gorton was referring to the communications
station at North—West Cape and space facilities at Pine Gap as well as
a station to be built at Woomera.
      These bases contribute to the military effectiveness and
protection of the Power on which the safety and independence of
Australia might in the future depend.
      The Prime Minister summed up : Our own security in a
changing world depends to a very great extent on our relations and
arrangements with the United States — and on the credibility of
U.S. Power being maintained.

