<!--start metadata-->
Title: Electoral redistribution, employment, gagging the parliament
Description: electoral talk
Date: 24/05/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL TALK                       For Sunday   24 May 75 3HA
                                     & Thursday 29 May 75 3YB

         THE GOVERNMENT'S PROPOSALS FOR ELECTORAL 
                       REDISTRIBUTION

One of the worst aspects of the proposed new electoral boundaries 
is their impact on country people.

The Government Is introducing proposals to cover all States with 
the exception of Western Australia.

The Opposition parties were united in rejecting thé new boundaries 
overwhelmingly.

We considered the redistribution .to be unnecessary and undesirable. 
They weakened the electoral position of the Liberal and Country 
Pa,pties in a way which we consider to be unfair,`

The Government gained office both in 197? and 19,4 with less than 
50 per cent of first prot'erenct_, votes and it commands a majority
or five in the House.

    it is attempting to improve its position without .improving 
its vote. If the redistribution were to.go through, the Government 
majority could go up to 11 seats without any increase in the
Labor Party's total share of the vote.

This is to.be done by reducing Labor majorities slightly in its safe
seats, and adding these voters to adjoining marginal seats. This 
is especially the case in Vi:c.toria, New South Wales and Tasmania.
In the country districts of New South Walestwo seats now held by
the Country Party would be affected. Paterson would belat to
Labor and the Country Party hold on Hume would be weakened.

In addition to this however, there is a gross inequity in the way 
boundaries have been drawn so that huge country seats have more 
voters in them than small urban seats.

An example is   the Victorian  electorate of Mallee, which has been
redrawn with an area of 23,000 square miles as compared with 
say, Latrobe in the Melbourne metropolitan area, covering 162 
square miles,.yet the Mallee electorate would have more voters 
in it at 66,410 under the redistribution, than Latrobe with
61,930•

There is another C?Veil llli)re glaring example in Queensland where 
the new seat of Flynn would cover 120,000 square miles and 
contain 63,811 voters; against 58,537 voters in the 715 Square 
mile metropolitan seat of Glasgow.

The Opposition parties say that this redistribution is unnecessary, 
undesirable, and an attempt by the Government to ,improve its 
position, not by governingi better, but by manipulating the laws 
over electoral matters.


















                                                      •

         THE CHANGING EMPLOYMENT PATTERN

There is more evidence of economic mismanagement in recent 
figures for public and private sector employment, which show a 
movement from private enterprise into the public service.

Employment in the public sector rose by 75,000 during:the year to 
March 31 while in the private sector it fell by 139,900.

This is the worst decline in private sector employment since 1947, 
far exceeding the decline in 1960-61.

Employment in the key manufacturing sector slumped to its loest 
level since July 1968, with a decrease since May of 126,900.

The'•ost of increased public sector employment, conservatively estimated 
on the basis average weekly earnings during the 12 months.to March 
1975 was $550 million. Assuming 20% inflation in the next 12 months, 
that wage bill will rise to $660 million. These figures mean that 
nationalprior-i.tles are now back to front.

It would be far better to stop the decline in private sector 
employment than to continue with 'a mopping up action that has 
produced such a massive increase in public sector employment during 
the past year.

           GAGGING THE PARLIAMENT

The leader of Government business in the hou e Mr Daly, 
effectively gagged the parliament during its first .week with 
a motion that prevented the Opposition from debating the issues
of the day.

The Opposition was still able to ask questions and .thus bring 
into the open thefailure of the Government's extravagant plan 
to borrow 2,000 million' dollars from the Arab nations of the 
Middle East, a scheme which if it had come off, would have mortgaged. 
the nations future for a whole generation.

The Opposition was also able 1:o press the Government over the 
 Conflict which has developed within the cabinet. and the caucus 
 ower the environment which. resulted in a. humiliating deCeat
 for the Minister for the Environment, Dr Cass.

 But the proper way to ventilate matters such as these is by-br._nging.
  discussion through debate on matters of public importance.

 Mr Daly's motion stopped this because it prevented such debates 
 until the Family Law Bill was passed, as it now has been.

