<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural Reconstruction Employment Training Scheme, bushfire studies, restrictive trade legislation, National Service
Description: Radio talk
Date: 19/09/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                SUNDAY, 19TH SEPTEMBER 1971
RADIO TALK      THURSDAY, 23rd SEPTEMBER 1971


    Last Thursday, Phillip Lynch, Minister for Labour and 
National Service outlined the Rural Reconstruction Employment 
Training Scheme. This scheme was to assist farmers who wished 
to pursue other employment. Many people must regret the necessity 
for this kind of arrangement. I personally regret the fact that 
all those who wish to pursue an occupation on the land are not 
able to do so. However, despite the assistance of Governments 
with subsidies and with rural reconstruction, we are in a position 
in which some people, by necessity, and others by choice have 
decided to move away from their farms. This training scheme is 
designed to assist them.

    The opportunity to undertake full time or part time 
training in technical education or through direct training on the 
job will be provided. Farmers eligible for this Scheme are those 
without prospects of long term economic viability. The Scheme 
will assist a farmer or his family if they have been working on 
the farm. Farmers who have been refused debt reconstruction 
assistance under the rural reconstruction programme or under the 
marginal dairy farmers agreement would be eligible. Applicants 
would choose their own field of technical training. Full and part 
time courses will be available. Full time training would be 
available for twelve months or twenty four months on a part time 
basis. The costs of fees will be borne by Government. Trainees 
in full time approved courses will receive an allowance of a 
little over $46 per week. There is an allowance for books and 
equipment and any travelling expenses will be provided. There 
will be an extra payment of $10 per week for married trainees 
who may have to live away from home. If anyone is interested in
this scheme, if they write to me I will see that an application 
form and a copy of the Minister's speech is made available. 
Alternatively, applications can be addressed to the Regional 
Director of the Department of Labour and National Service or they 
may be lodged with any District Employment Office. Again, I 
regret the need for this measure, but it is something which is 
necessary in the present circumstances.

                                   2.

     Bushfire Studies

          Forest fire problems in California are very similar 
     to those in Australia. Forestry officials are to make a study 
     tour of fire control operations in the United States. The tour 
     will take place during the worst period of the Californian fire 
     season. United States fire control methods, including the use 
     of helicopters and other aircraft, will be examined. The 
     Australians for their part will lecture in Australian practice.

     Restrictive Trade Legislation

          You will have seen recent reports of the High Court 
     decision that has great implications for future legislation. 
•    While the High Court struck out provisions of present Commonwealth 
     Restrictive Trade Legislation, the Court at the same time 
     indicated that the Commonwealth has power to act in these areas 
     provided the legislation is properly drawn. As a result the 
     Commonwealth has decided to strengthen the Restrictive Trade 
     Practices Act and is also examining the implications of the 
     judgement in other areas to strengthen competitive influences 
     in Australia. As a result of this High Court decision the 
     Commonwealth will have a much more effective Restrictive Trade 
     Practices Act than would otherwise have been possible.


     Period of National Service Reduced by Six Months

          Following the decision that the Australian troops would 
     be withdrawn from Vietnam by Christmas, it was announced that the 
     period for full time National Service would be reduced from two 
     years to 18 months. The time on the reserve (which does not 
     involve any training commitments but renders those involved
     liable for call-up in the event of a national emergency) will be 
     extended from the present three years to 32 years. The 
     alternative of five years in the C.M.F. Forces remains.

          Arrangements are now in hand for those who have already 
     served 18 months or more to be discharged progressively over the 
     next three to four months.

                                3.


        No doubt there will be a wide divergence of opinions 
    expressed furing the forthcoming debate on this subject. The 
    vital point to keep in mind is the reason why we have National 
    Service; that is to provide the Defence Forces which the 
    Government considers necessary for the adequate defence of 
    Austral ia.

        This is an issue quite separate from the Vietnam war. 
    National Service was introduced before we sent troops to Vietnam, 
    and for the same reasons as it was introduced will be continued 
    after our troops are withdrawn. It is a form of national 
    insurance to give a measure of security to Australia.
•       It is most important to remember that National Service 
    provides many more trained men than the 12,000 actually serving 
    in the, Army. There are in addition 20,000 fully trained 
    ex-national Servicemen in the Reserve and a total of 51,000 
    men have been trained since the inception of the scheme in 1964. 
    In addition there are 12,000 who have chosen to serve in the 
    C.M.F.

        Less than 1% have failed to report for National Service 
    without reasonable cause and 3% have been granted total exemption 
    as conscientious objectors. It is also worth remembering that 
    9% of National Servicemen are volunteers; they sought to be
•   enlisted and were accepted.

