<!--start metadata-->
Title: Liberal employment and industrial relations policy
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 14/04/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA                   PARLIAMENT HOUSE
       HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES                  CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 
                                                 TEL. 721211


    FOR INFORMATION              EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m., Sunday 
                                           14 April, 1974. 


      ELECTORAL STATEMENT BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, 
      M.P., MEMBER FOR WANNON - 14 APRIL, 1974. 

      Last week I announced, on behalf of both the Liberal Party
and the Country Party, a new employment and industrial relations 
policy.
                                •
      Among the new initiatives in this policy we are giving 
much greater emphasis to improving employer/employee
communication in order to prevent the development of strikes. 
We believe that employers ought to establish in factories and 
work places some permanent mechanism of their own choosing to 
achieve this by discussing with their employees matters such as
the company's future plans, the employment effectlof technological
changes and promotional opportunities.    We want to see
employees given a greater sense of involvement and participation.
They cannot be regarded as just another input in the production 
process.


      Recently I was given an example of a particula' company with a
bad industrial safety record.    It vastly improved that record as
soon as the company asked the employees themselves what ought to 
be done and implemented their proposals.

      We are also pledged to fight discrimination in employment 
where it is against women or any other group, or individual. While 
many women prefer to look after their homes, others who choose or
are forced through inflation to go out to work must be given an 
equal opportunity.


      We maintain the right of a person to join or not to join 
a union, but in a new departure for the Liberal Party and the 
Country Party, we are advocating positively that people should 
participate in their industry or professional organisations. But
whatever a Government might try to do in the. industrial field
there must be goodwill, commonsense, restraint and understanding
on both sides. Unhappily there are in Australia too many 
examples where this is not the case.

      I mentioned the need for better communication between
employees and employers.   This ought to achieve-a better 
understanding of each others' problems and improve the working
environment on the shop floor.   Its success is dependent on
adequate information.

       I want to give one example where I believe three multi- 
 national companies are acting in a way which is contrary to. . 
 the interests of themselves and the union movement in Austràlia. 
 The multi-national companies concerned are General Motors, Ford
 and Chrysler.  The issue involves standard times.  These are 
 the specific times which each company considers should be
 taken for the performàfce of each task on their vehicle assembly
 lines.   The calculation of these times is a most objective and 
 precise matter. . It is also most important because they form 
 the basis for ensuring that each employee works at about the 
 same rate and under about the same pressure as his mates.
 Of course this is an area where industrial disputes can and do
 occur.   When they occur at the Leyland N.S.W. plant that
 company provides the necessary standard times information to the 
 employees so that the matter can be responsibly discussed between
 management and union representatives. The Vehicle Builders
 Employees Federation has a dynamic leadership. To men such 
 as those in charge of the V.B.E.F. industrial relations is a
 sophisticated field of endeavour. They want to discuss
 facts not opinion that can be bound in prejudice. At G.M.H.s
plant there has been some industrial disruption.  One cause
 involves standard times information. G.M.H. refuses to
 disclose those vital standard times. Without them it is
 impossible to demonstrate factually that one person is not being 
asked to work harder than the man to the left'or right of him. 
 Ignorance, in this case denial of facts which ought to be made 
available encourages irresponsibility and very often prolongs and
exacerbatesan unnecessary industrial dispute. If Leyland can 
do it why can't G.M.H., Ford and Chrysler.

       In fact the matter goes further. I find it offensive that
these very same American corporations by agreement with American 
automobile workers have for more than 10 years provided this kind 
of standard time information to members of the American unions
in a dispute situation.   In other words they are prepared to
make available to American unions information that they are not
prepared to make available to Australian unions.  In discussions 
I have held on the issue it has been suggested to me, that the 
American unions are more responsible than their Australian 
counterparts, that American unions appreciate that greater 
productivity results in higher wages, that more effective work, 
not necessarily harder work, can benefit employees as well as
employers.   To that I say that if Australian unions are less 
responsible - and I do not know if they are - perhaps part of 
that irresponsibility is due to lack of information from employers. 
If that information were made available it might well be easier 
to establish arrangements which would effectively improve
productivity.   It is also suggested that such disclosures might 
result in the Arbitration Commission demanding similar information 
on which to base awards and that the standard times may be
useful to competitors in vehicle manufacture.

                              3.


           I believe that proper arguments put to the Commission would 
     not only safeguard the confidentiality of any such information 
     given to the Commission, but that also the Commission would 
     reject unreasonable claims to have such standard times 
     information written into an award.


          Finally, I find`-my support for the unions here backed 
     in the general tenor of a report of a Committee of experts of the
     International Labour Organisation.  It is part of the spirit of 
     that report that multi-national companies ought not to treat 
     trade unions in the host country in a less reasonable manner than
    they do in their own countries.   It is not only Leylands 
    but other industries in Australia that make the kind of
    information about which I have-been talking available.  Multi- 
    national companies have contributed a great deal to the 
    development of Australia and that should be acknowledged but 
    in restricting the legitimate flow of information between 
    employer and employee they are damaging the interests, not 
    only of their employees and the community generally, but also
    of themselves.











•

RADIO BROADCAST (in continuation)




       The Liberal and Country Part >have considered the events

of this last week with a great deal of care and concern.     Not 


concern for ourselves, but concern for Australia. We are in 

a position 1h:-ems. we now have firm and positive evidence that 

the Prime Minister is preparing to use virtually any means to

gain complete control over both the Houses of Parliament.     The 


Prime Minister has talked about a mandate, but there is also a

mandate for people who have been elected to the Senate.     It is 


rely xilaw firm belief that if the Prime Minister had had a majority 

in the Senate over the last 18 months he and his Government

would be infinitely more unpopular now than they in fact are. 

It is the Senate and the responsible use of the Opposition Senate 

majority which has prevented the worst ravages of many of the 

Prime Minister's proposals falling on the Australia people.




       I believe people in country areas would appreciate this 

because mss-tlof the hostile acts which the Prime Minister has done

to the country community ha,ve\-13-fiporlei tY_his drelLni- s tta.tiofi,,; _
                  `L
"gpLere`watuagn                     and-as a esult the Senate /
r
power to protect the country community from this Government's

hostility has been greatly reduced.    Other various measures which 

have affected the Australian community generally have required

legislation and ,s e have beee           tt_-nt~:h s modified to

mitigate their worse effects.    There is no need to have me remind

                                                            .../3

                               3.




you of the Government's actions to the rural communities.     The


superphosphate decision was the last,, dal which confirmed the 

hostility. \But l#need to remember that we have a Government


that promised low; rates of interest au =i tt-ë t= =:t    or all
           ~.~ )
Australians and,-    those seeking to buy their own home are now


higher than ever. We have a Government that premised that it 


would not increase income tax, but by its actions it will


increase its collections from income tax by $1,500 or $1,600 


million this year. We have a Government that promised industrial 


peace, yet we have a Minister for Labour who on every occasion


takes one side against the other, often making inflammatory
                                                a
comments which makes it much harder to get to tim reasoned


settlement to an industrial dispute.


                                                                       P

       We have a Government w '-          "-ntr44gteld. shortages,

                              because under Labor protse en-has 


not been able to keep pace with demand and many productive 


enterprises are held up because of shortages of essential 


equipment, because of shortages to basic materials.





       We have a Government that has shown its complete

financial irresponsibility.    It is determined to spend and to spend 


and to spend, and it is your money they are getting rid of, and as 


a result the cost of a housing commission home, the cost of


a school, has risen enormouslytant ur dollars are depreciating

                              4.

rapidly in value.  It is not the wealthy or the powerful who are
hurt in these circumstances, but the average person in Australia 
especially retired people, especially people wanting to by their
own homy   In spite of the increase in the pension by $3, that
increase hardly matches the inflation of the last year. Within
Australia the Government has created economic chaos. It has 
created a situation in which no individual can plan his future with 
any degree of certainty or confidence. Lûverseas we know that the 
Government has on almost every possible occasion publicly
rebuked or offended important friends and allies, both
close to Australia and further afield. This has been part of the 
process to win new friends in China, in Russia and in Africa. 
There is no need to abuse traditional allies in the search for new
friendships.  The Government does not recognise the basic 
instability and danger caused by the realttonships between China,
Russia, Japan, Europe and America.  In a situation of grave 
uncertainty the Government is allowing our defence forces and 
defence capacity to be destroyed rapidly.

       This is the record of the Governmentin major areas that 
affect-call our livesand (On top of all of this there came the 
attempt to gain control of the Senate by a manner that was certainly
without precedent, and in my view, quite improper. It was not a
democratic process.  The accumulation of all of thèse events 
has caused the Cpposition Parties to come to a decision to try 
and defeat the Government, to force a general election so that

               5.

all Australia can cast a considered judgement whether they want 
this Government to continue, or whether they want it replaced 
by a Government led by Bill Snedden that will restoi sanity and 
responsibility, a sense of national purpose and conviction to 
Australian affairs.

