<!--start metadata-->
Title: Peace talks in Vietnam, wool industry
Description: Radio talk
Date: 18/10/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   Sunday 18th October 1970 - 3HA 
RADIO TALK        Thursday 22nd October 1970 - 3YB
       This week I would like to talk with you about President Nixon's 
   major initiative for peace in Indochina...emergency financial assistance 
   for woolgrowers...an Australian wool carpet success at EXPO '70 
   in Japan and a misunderstanding of the propo ed wool marketing authority.
       President Nixon's bold new initiative for peace in Vietnam, and 
   Indochina generally, is I believe a strong and statesmanlike bid to arrange 
   negotiation of a meaningful and honourable settlement for both sides in 
   the South East Asian conflict. 9
       The President's five-point offer to the communists, made with the 
   concurrence of all nations fighting on the Free World side in Indochina, 
   is both moderate and reasonable.
       It is a most significant call for peace and one that should be 
   given fullest attention by the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong. However, 
   it is doubtful if the other side will feel able to respond to enable 
   positive progress to be made toward a permanent and peaceful settlement 
   of the war.
       I believe that if Hanoi refuses to negotiate about the Presi'dent's 
   ceasefire plan it will be quite clear...even to those who may sympathise 
   with North Vietnam's aims...that the North will have no part in what is 
   the only way to begin ending the war.
       Briefly, the five main points in the President's plan are for an:
       1. Immediate ceasefire by both sides to extend throughout 
         Indochina under international supervision.
       2. Broadening of the Paris peace talks to include Laos and 
         Cambodia, as well as North and South Vietnam.
       3. Negotiation of ari agreed timetable for complete withdrawals 
         as part of an overàll settlement.
       4. A political settlement that meets the aspirations of all 
         South Vietnamese.
       5. Immediate and unconditiónal release of all prisoners-of-war 
         held by both sides.

       By these five points I believe President Nixon has taken a

                          /2

                                 2.


substantial step forward in his quest for peace in Vietnam and Indochina.

           The President's approach reflects our Government's policy that we 

should stand firm for the right of all South Vietnamese people to determine 

for themselves the kind of Government they want.


           But it is obvious that the only kind of settlement that will 

endure is one that both sides have an interest in preserving.


           The President makes this clear in his statement: "We have no 

intention of seeking any settlement at the conference table othèr than 

one which fairly meets the reasonable concerns of both sides."


           The aim has always been, and should be, for peace in the world 

where every nation can be free and independent, with no fear of foreign or 

outside aggression.
       ----~./---         ~__------- '-
      ~                   ....000....


           Initial payments of emergency financial assistance from the 

Commonwealth are now being received by woolgrowers.


           Solar about 800 cheques, totalli    g more than $600,000 have been 

posted to growers in all areas who had lod     ed early claims for assistance. 

I have been told that payments will contin     e to be made daily.


           Of the payment cheques posted so    far, about 30% are for the 

maximum grant of $ 1,500. These payments       re being made to woolgrowers 

who have suffered a large shortfall in woo      incomes between the periods

June 30, 1969 and June 30, 1970.


           This is in line with details o the scheme announced to 

Parliament on August 19 this year.


           You will recall that the sch me was introduced by the Government 

because woolgrowers, suffering from the effect of a drastic fall-in wool 

prices in 1969-70 and a severe drought, were in need of financial assistance.

           Arrangements have been made s o that there will be only minimum delay 

in making initial payments to woolgrowers.

           However, it is clear that many woolgrówers who are eligible for a 

financial grant have not yet submitted returns.



                                                         /3

                                                                            3.

                            I would urge these woolgrowers to send in their applications as soon 
    as possible and not put off applying until the closing date in November. 
    Eligible woolgrowers who did not delay in lodging applications will receive 
    a prompt interim payment.

                          Application forms can be obtained from Post Offices and should be 
    forwarded to the Secretary, Department of Primary Industry, Box 2528W at the 
    G.P.O., Melbourne.
                                                              . .  . • 0 00 . . . .

                          An excellent example of the superiority of Australian carpet wool 
    over synthetic fibres was revealed in Parliament this week.
                          At EXPO '70 in Osaka, Japan, the Australian pavilion used a carpet 
  woven from pure Australian wool.

                          The American pavilion used a carpet made of synthetic fibres.
                          It was recorded that in excess-of 11 million people went through 
  the Australian pavilion and that about 15 million walked through the American 
  pavilion.

                          In June, the American synthetic carpet was worn out completely and 
  was replaced.
                         Now at the termination of EXPO '70, the second American synthetic 
  carpet is worn out and, I am advised, is of no further use.

                         On the other hand, the original Australian                                                         wool carpet, which bore
 the traffic of more than 11 million people is in                                                                              good       order that it                    is
 to remain in use in the Australian pavilion which has been given by the 
 Australian Government to a city in Japan.

                        I see this vignette as a clear example of the superiority of pure 
Australian wool over man-made, synthetics for use in carpet manufacture.
                                                              ...000....
                        Finally I would like to clear up a misunderstanding about the proposed 
Australian Wool Commission, or marketing authority. Constituents who called 
on me at Parliament House this week told me they were concerned because they had 
heard that the total purchases by the Commission would not exceed 10% of the wool 
clip. This is not correct. I stress, it is wrong.•. The 10% was only a 
recommendation by the Crawford Report. The recommendation was not accepted. The 
facts are: "The Government has decided that no quantitative or financial limits
should be placed on the amount of wool that can be purchased and held by the

                                                                                                                                                               /4

e
                     4.
   Commission, as any limitation could adversely affect the operations of the 
   Wool Commission."


                 ...000...

