<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth control of air transport
Description: press statement
Date: 1/11/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT; 

MA LC OLM FRASER :


                                                   November 1st, 1964



                 Over the last few weeks an argument has been developing 
between the Commonwealth and. the States concerning intra-State air transport.

                 The origins of this argument go back to 1937 when a legal 
case in the High Court gave the Commonwealth to understand that the 
regulation of intra-State services depended upon State Government Laws or 
regulations. Earlier this year, in another case, certain members of the 
High Court, including the former Chief Justice, seemed to cast some doubt on 
this restriction of Commonwealth powers. There seemed to be strong 
implication in what was said that the Commonwealth would have full power to 
regulate all international and national air traffic. As a result of this 
the Commonwealth has introduced additional air transport regulations which 
will make State regulations unnecessary.

                 There are some powerful reasons for Commonwealth control 
over all air transport. In 1937 intra-State services operated over 12,000
miles and carried just over 16,000 passengers. Now the route mileage is 
over 43,000 while nearly one million passengers are carried each year. 
Between the two periods, subsidies for non-paying rural services have 
increased from an almost negligible amount to nearly £2M. The subsidies 
are paid entirely by the Commonwealth, and without them many rural services 
would not be able to operate.

                 Commonwealth assistance for air transport has extended much 
further than this. Shortly after the war large numbers of D.C.3 aircraft 
were obtained from the United States and sold to airlines at very low prices 
and, more recently, for example, Fokker Friendships have been sold to country 
airlines on most favourable terms.

                 The Commonwealth has more than £60M invested in airport 
facilities. In 1937 this figure stood at only £1M.

                 The Commonwealth has also provided the Government airline 
with £25M. for the purchase of modern aircraft.

                 At the present moment, a five-year airport development 
program is under way which will cost £50M. This involves work in all States,
and last year £6M. was spent under this heading. In addition, the Common- 
wealth made a direct contribution of £470,000 to the development and 
maintenance of municipally-owned aerodromes. This figure will rise in this 
year.

                 It is notable that on this count the Commonwealth will be 
spending something like a total of £50,000 for the development of Portland 
aerodrome in co-operation with the Portland Town Council and the Heywood 
Shire, who will find a similar amount between them.

                 Night landing facilities will be provided at the three 
aerodromes in Western Victoria at Warrnambool, Hamilton and Portland, and it 
is hoped that these facilities will be available for operation in the coming 
winter.

                 If, as appears likely, the major airlines will want to buy 
small pure jets, the standards in many country aerodromes will have to be up- 
graded so that they can handle the superior type of aircraft likely to be 
introduced. It has been suggested that this kind of program could involve 
the Commonwealth in a further £lOM.


                                                                  f2

                2



      All of this represents a very considerable Commonwealth
involvement.

      The smooth and effective development of air transport in 
Australia is attributable directly to Commonwealth interest and to the 
facilities that have and are continually being provided and improved by the 
Commonwealth. Because of this Commonwealth involvement and because of the 
speed and necessity for co-ordination, it is felt, in view of the changed 
legal situation, that the Commonwealth should assume more direct control 
over intra-State services, as it already does, of course, over inter-State 
services. Another reason for this is that at the major airports the 
intra-State and inter-State operators would be using the same facilities 
which are provided entirely by the Commonwealth. As a result of all this 
the Commonwealth has introduced new Air Navigation Regulations to give effect 
to powers which a High Court judgement of earlier this year indicated may 
be available to the Commonwealth.

      I believe that most people would think this is a pretty fair 
case. However this matter has, most unfortunately, become involved, in 
New South Wales in particular, in an argument between two intra-State 
airlines - East-West Airlines and Airlines of New South Wales. The New 
South Wales Government has taken the view that some of the lines developed 
and up to now serviced by Airlines of New South Wales should be arbitrarily 
taken away from that airline• and given to East-West Airlines. While many 
Australians will have sympathy for the smaller airline, East--West Airlines, 
there will be many also who may doubt the justice of arbitrarily taking 
away air routes developed by Airlines of New South Wales and giving them 
to another airline. This is certainly expropriation and there is no 
compensation for it. Indeed, at one stage it appeared that pressure was 
also going to be brought on Airlines of New South Wales to sell Fokker 
Friendships to East-West Airlines because, under the redistribution as out- 
lined by the N.S.W. Government, that airline-would not have a use for all 
its aircraft.

      Thus the general Commonwealth situation has unfortunately 
become involved in a local domestic issue in New South Wales with a high 
political and emotional content. The whole matter is going to be the 
subject of litigation, I would imagine, on more than one count, and until 
the law has been fully tested both the action of the N.S.W. Government and 
of the Commonwealth Government in promulgating new Air Navigation Regulations 
must remain in doubt.

      As I suppose one might expect, all the Premiers have replied to 
a letter from the Prdme Minister on this matter indicating a general objection 
to the Commonwealthts assuming full responsibility for national air transport 
inside Australia. They object on the traditional grounds that the Common- 
wealth action offers a further challenge to Sovereign State rights. There 
are many fields where an objection of this kind has validity, but I doubt 
very much if the objection can be sustained in a realistic manner over this 
particular problem.

      People in Western Victoria will be concerned about the outcome 
of these arguments and pending litigation because of the services now 
available to Warrnambool and Hamilton and which will also be available to 
Portland once the aerodrome is completed.




             ------o0o--..-....

