<!--start metadata-->
Title: Leave for troops in Vietnam
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 22/06/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                           -















   20R PRESS






                                               No. 4913












                     LEAVE FOR TROOPS INT VIETNAM











                Statement by the Minister for the Army, 






                    the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.
















          Complaints had been received from some soldiers concerning 










   leave provisions for service in Vietnam.











          Stating this today, the Minister


                                     for the Army said that some








   misunderstanding had been caused by a recent 



                                         decision to review the 





   location at which



                  soldiers would be allowed to

                                          takeleave granted in


                                                            lieu


   of duty performed in Vietnam on Sundays



                                    and Public Holidays.

                                                      Soldiers who 




   were called upon for duty on these days 



                                    could be recompensed

                                                      either by 


   being allowed to stand



                      down from duty locally for an


                                               equivalent period,



   or,under certain



                  conditions, to accumulate this


                                            leave until their return



   toAustralia.

               Thefirst ten days of such extra 




                                           duty are recompensed






   automatically by the


                    five days R & R leave and the five days local leave 





  in Vung Tau, allowed 





                    to all troops. '`here troops are required to work




  more than ten Sundays





                     or holidays, additional recompense is necessary. 





  For health and other reasons



                          it is essential






  proper rest and that lost rest days be made uth ~t soldiers should get their








                                        P ~ soon as possible that is,








  by equivalent local leave or stand down, rather than by accumulation and 






  deferment until return to Australia.












        However it was recognised that 





                                  commitments in Vietnam

  to the size of the force                            in relation








                       made it difficult to grant unlimited stand-down.



 For this re&son, a local








                       instruction had permitted accumulation of days 




 in lieu of Sundays and holidays up to 24.

















        The recent decision of the Government to increase the size of the 



 force by 900 men was specificall






                            y intended in part, to ease the problem










 of granting stand-down to troops. It was decided accordingly that the







 accumulation of deferred days would be





                                  limited to 12 after 1 July 1967,









 thus increasing the requirement for local stand-down. The total entitlement 









 is not changed in any way, and no soldier who has accumulated




                                                     more than







 twelve deferred days under the old conditions would have his accumulation 







 reduced.
















       None of the foregoing affects in any way the other entitlements 











for soldiers serving in Vietnam including the 30 days Recreation Leave












to be taken on return to Australia. This is two weeks more than the annual 
leave entitlement for service in Australia. Soldiers who accumulated the























maximum of 12 days deferred leave in lieu of Sundays and holidays would 









thus have a leave entitlement of 42 working days or seven weeks on return











to Australia, in addition to any leave left over from their service prior 





to Vietnam















       The Minister concluded by saying that directions had been issued to 











the Commander AAFV to promulgate the full entitlement to all troops to 







obviate further misunderstanding.




















                                  Lists: A and B.











                                  Further information:







22 June 1967


                         CANBERRA: Major E. Ross-Smith









                                    (65-4061) (49-6030)




                     OTHER STATES: ADPR 

                                         COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

