<!--start metadata-->
Title: Communism
Description: press statement
Date: 20/09/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT          September 20th;1959
MALCOLM FRASER
       The other night, before the adjournment, Jim Killen, the 
Member for Moreton, Queensland, got up and said it was a terrible thing 
that the Bolshoi Ballet were in Australia. He said there was a member 
of the M.V.D. travelling with the troupe, and he tried to show that the 
Russians use these cultural contacts for purely political purposes. 
There is, of course, some truth in this.
       When Jim Killen sat down Gough Whitlam, from the Labour 
Party, in a delightful but dangerous manner, poured ridicule on what 
the former speaker had been trying to do. Both speakers were to some 
extent wrong, and to some extent right. We know that the Russians use 
cultural contacts for political purposes, but we should still have these 
contacts while making sure we keep our eyes open,
       On the other hand, to pour ridicule on someone who is only 
trying to point out, if in too vehement a way, that the Russians use 
these contacts for political purposes is also wrong because there is 
no doubt that there is politics in all these things and we must have 
knowledge of it and be aware of it,
       Sir Wilfrid Kent Hughes, at a later hour, brought sanity 
back into the debate and spoke of his experiences when he was Chairman 
of the Australian Olympic Games' Committee, It was known that most of 
the Soviet officials were from the M.V.D., that goes automatically.. 
The Olympic Committee were asked if the Russians could keep an Iron 
Curtain ship in the bay throughout the Games on which the Iron Curtain 
athletes would be able to stay. They would then not have had to go to 
the Olympic Village where there would be danger of contact with 
Australians and other athletes from the democracies. I understand 
the Russians were told that the Port would be too busy and there
wouldn't be any room for the Gruzia to tie up at the wharf all that
 time, The Russians stayed at the Olympic Village. For the first 
two or three days the officials tried to keep the Iron Curtain athletes 
banded together to prevent them fraternising, it was a hopeless task and 
the Agents soon realised it and some of the Russians began to go about 
alone.
       At the closing ceremony of the Olympic Games Sir Wilfrid

                             2

told us of two of his own friends who were sitting behind an Iron 
Curtain athlete. These two people had been trying to speak to the 
athlete in English, but he pretended not to understand. Towards 
the end of the afternoon the emotion of the occasion overcame him 
and the athlete turned to them and said "you are lucky to live in
a free country."  Having realised what he said he could understand 
English no longer.
         It may not be generally known that 40 Olympic Games athletes 
applied for political asylum, A previous immigrant, who had been 
helping those who wanted asylum, was warned by one of the M.V.D. 
officials that if he went on with his tactics they would "get him". 
Unfortunately, possibly as a result of that and past experience 
before he came to this country, this person eventually committed 
suicide,
         The athletes who wanted political asylum asked to be 
gathered together in one area in the Olympic Village and put under 
guard until the Gruzia, the Iron Curtain ship, had left.
         Many officials in this country did not know that after 
the Games at H elsinki, or after certain events, athletes were 
picked up in the streets by M.V.D. agents and placed on a ship 
similar to the Gruzia so there would be no possibility of being left 
behind,
         The people wishing to help the 40 athletes experienced a 
great deal of difficulty, but eventually 40 sought and achieved 
political asylum in this country.
         I repeat all this in this talk to show that almost every- 
thing that happens in our relations with the communist powers is 
riddled with politics, but at the same time we cannot get anywhere 
if we do not make contact with these people. Those of us who 
wish to have no contact of any kind are living in an unrealistic 
manner. In my view the more contacts the better, through sporting 
organizations, through culture and art, or through tourists, but 
while we have these contacts we must never forget or under estimate 
the tactics and the political motives that often lie behind them,

              3 ONO

It is unlikely that the rulers of any Communist country would 
ever be converted to different philosophies, but if there can 
be contact on a sufficiently large scale many individuals in 
these countries may come to doubt the theories of communism 
and ultimately their doubts may find expression inside their 
own countries. These must be the hopes that underline all 
contacts with Iron Curtain countries,

