<!--start metadata-->
Title: 25-27 September
Description: Reports on proceedings in Canberra - radio talk 
Date: 7/10/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                          -
               WILOOLli FRAnii A.P. FOR WaliiiONth-S2:_qh SEPUIMER •
          In t-is last week the souse of Representatives has been 
debating the Social Services and the Repatriation Billa which give 
effect to the concessions announced by tha Treasurer in his Budget.
          Important as ttlese two measures are to the wellbeing of 
zany thousands of Australians, taey have been overshadowed by the 
krize Liais6er's 6tatement ou Suez and by Dr. Lvatt's reply. The 
Government's attitude on this vital problem is, I feel, quite clear. 
It is also realistic and we as member of this great Australian 
Commonwealta must not flinch if reality is unpleasant.
           The Suez Canal ia not important for paasenger traffic, it 
is not even vital for trade between Australia and Great Britain but 
it is vital to zillions of people in Western Àurope. There was a time 
when the industries of these countries depended upon coal but now 
 the industries of Great Britain and of Western Europe will grind to 
 a stop if their supplies of oil are out off. The greater part of 
 these essential supplies come from south of the Canal. There are not 
 the ships to carry the required quantities around the Cape of Good Hope 
 and Western Europe has not the dollar resources to buy oil from:U.S.A. 
 except for a short time as emergency measures. The Canal must be 
 kept open to all the free snipe of the world and the chief users cannot 
 be blamed for wanting some guarantee that this will be done. It is 
 true that hasser has said he will not break the 1888 Convention 
 guaranteeing free passage to all nations but it is also true that he 
 has already torn up an agreement with the Suez Company 12 years before 
 time. How much can the word of a Dictator be trusted in this matter. 
 Were positive guarantees offree passage must be achieved.
            The whole difficult and intricate problem has now gone to 
 the U.N.O. Because of the power of Veto in the security Council, which 
 has been used by the Russians about 50 times and by the rast of the 
 world only about 4 times, the difficulty of reaching u just and adequate 
 decision in the U.N.O. will be great. (Nevertheless this could well be 
 the hour of supreme trial for this young organisation designed to
 achieve international Justice.)

          No problem since the end of the last great war has been more 
fraught with grave danger or with such extreme possibilitie of
disaster, not only for the British Commonwealth but for all the£'ree 
World.
          It will be the greatest ponsible triumph for the U.N.C. if 
it can achieve e satisfactory and just solution of tiJia extreme problam, 
if it cannot the consequence will be unhappy indeed. One point elope 
brings out the significance, Pupeis end America probably now possess 
sufficient atomic weapons to destroy the world as we know it. This 
fact must alter the diplomacy and the tectics used in tho settle ment 
of any dispute.
          Even though we place our faith in the United Netions, it would 
be folly not to look beyond to see what alternetives ara left in the
event of failure, They seeM to be: (a) econeilie sanctions, (b) further 
negotiations while maintaining vital principles, (0) resignation to
doing nothing with Egypt left in virtual control of the eeployment and 
prosperity of millions of people in *estern Europe, or (d) force.
          Dr. Evatt unhappily adooted en attitude that will not help 
the western powers in their negotiations. Ha opposed economic sanctions 
because of their cruelty to individuals in Egypt, not realising the
cruelty and hardship that would follow to many British citizens if :gypt 
blocked the Canal. He said the mnintenence of vital principles would limi 
the scope of negotiations and was not neeessary. This view, I believe, 
is unworthy of a leader who holds the sape poet that once belonged to
Chifley and Curtin. No man or oountiy can afford to et aside principl,z 
          I hope and pray that U.N.O. will succeed but if it does not 
one of the alternatives, or o combinetion of the alternatives, I mentioned 
must be followed.
                            4111101•111•1111011111.11111MOMMINIMO0

