<!--start metadata-->
Title: National health, annual 3HA hospital appeal
Description: press statement
Date: 25/09/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Ladies & Gentlemen:
      I have been asked to open the Annual 3 HA Hospital 
Appeal. This Appeal is opening today, 25th September. It will 
remain open until December 4th when there will be a continuous 
day-long Appeal.
      This Annual Appeal serves to raise funds for 
hospitals - the Base Hospital at Hamilton and the hospitals of 
Macarthur, Coleraine, Casterton, Penshurst, Merino, Skipton, 
Portland and 4fi1ta.
      This year, each hospital is going to put in a 
candidate for the "Miss Glenelg" Radio Appeal, and functions will 
be organised in your local areas centred around your individual 
candidates. It is hoped that as many people as possible will, 
throughout the coming weeks and months, support this Appeal, as 
this public participation and help plays a most important part 
in the smooth running of our hospitals.
      Incidentally, the winner of the "Miss Glenelg" Radio 
Appeal will be given a free trip to Hayman Island for herself and 
for a chaperone. This trip has been donated by Mr. Reg. Ansett 
who has never forgotten that his great business enterprises began 
in Hamilton.
      I thought you may be interested to hear a little 
of how the business of National Health is managed at the present 
time. Health is no longer a simple thing and the framework of 
organisations and of hospitals that has been established in 
recent years is greatly complicated and involves, quite naturally, 
the people in the local communities and their hospitals. It also 
involves the States and the Commonwealth. It can truly be said 
that the business of health is a partnership between the people, 
the State and Commonwealth Governments. Each has an importand 
and vital role to play.
      Hospitals are, of course, much more directly concerned 
with State Governments and instrumentalities than they are with 
the Commonwealth. The hospitals are supervised by the Hospital

                             -2-


and Charities Commission_s most of the funds availablen
to the hospitals. Each year, the different hospitals submit a 
budget to the Hospitals and Charities Commission, and after the 
Commission has had a look at the budget, the Commission makes 
whatever grant it can to help the hospitals. This generally 
covers about 62% of the hospital's maintenance charges, In 
addition, the hospitals get hospital benefits from the Commonwealth 
which makes up a further 7%. The Government money, then, that 
goes to the hospital is near enough to 70%. The rest of the money 
that the hospital finds comes from public appeals, charitable 
contributions and hospital fees. Of this, the hospital fees are 
by far the largest part, but the charitable contributions made by 
individuals, in answer to Appeals of this kind and to others, 
are most important for the smooth and efficient running of our 
hospitals.
              Since the war, the Commonwealth Government has 
come into the National Health business on a large scale. This is 
because it is recognised that the Government has an obligation 
as regards certain aspects of National Health which cannot be put 
aside, and in many fields, the obligation can only be properly 
met by the Central Authority and that is the Coxiinonwealth Government.
                                                     th Government


                                          ria receive
In 1949, t e Commonwealth made £150,000 available un. er 
Tuberculosis arrangement that had been made with the States.In,,.
recent years this figure has been between £5M. and £6M. The peak ``~
year was in 1956-57. Since then, the total made available to     X) 
combat Tuberculosis has declined to a certain extent, This was
a sign that the campaign initiated by the Commonwealth had been 
markedly successful. Victoria was one of the States to get off 
the mark quickest in regard to the Tuberculosis arrangements, 
Under these arrangements, the Tuberculosis Wardswould be paid for

              -3-

entirely by the Commonwealth, and further, the maintenance of the 
beds in that ward would be paid for entirely by the Commonwealth.
      Probably everyone has, at some time or another, come 
across the mobile X-ray units which have visited many centres to 
test people for Tuberculosis. The campaign, so far as Victoria 
is concerned, has been so well run and so efficiently managed that 
Victoria does not now need the full number of Tuberculosis beds 
that were originally established. ,50 beds have been transferred 
from the Tuberculosis to general hospital wards. This shows that 
the campaign initiated by the Commonwealth has been most successful, 
especially so in this State which was one of the first to recognise 
the need to act in this sphere.
      Incidentally, it is worth noting that beds that are 
transferred in this way from Tuberculosis to general wards represent 
a clear gain to the States because such wards have been established 
and paid for entirely by the Commonwealth and When they are no longer 
needed for their original purpose they are transferred. They become 
an addition to the State's general wards at no cost at all to the 
States concerned. So this is a secondary but important benefit 
from the efficiency of the Tuberculosis campaign in Victoria.
      The Couunonwealth also assists hospitals in other 
ways. There is, first of all, the 8/- which is paid direct to the 
hospitals for patients who are in a hospital ward. This is what 
is known as the ordinary Commonwealth benefit. Even though this 
amount is only 8/- a day, it totalled nearly £10M. during the 
12 months ended 30th June, 1960. However, in addition to this 
ordinary benefit, the Commonwealth subsidises the voluntary 
insurance scheme in which a great number of people now participate. 
As a result of this arrangement, last year the Commonwealth paid 
to insured persons another sum of just under £10M. This made 
the Commonwealth contribution to maintenance of hospital beds 
nearly £20M, in the last financial year. In addition to this, 
the Hospital Benefit Funds paid out about £12M. All this created 
a pool of about £30M. which was available to all the States to

                               -'4-


supplement public and private hospital revenues.
              The importance of the Commonwealth subsidy to insured 

persons is this. Without the Commonwealth subsidy, the rate of 

insurance would have to be pretty high before there would be worth 

while returns to the insured person. However, with the Commonwealth 
contribution, a reasonably moderate payment can /1attract quite 

substantial benefits from the different funds jj People who have been 
insured and whose families have suffered sickness have, I am sure, 

recognised the real advantage of this system and it may not be out 

of place at the present time to suggest to any person who is not 

insured that they should make inquiries from their local doctor or 

chemist to see if they should not enter this voluntary scheme.
              There is another instance in which Victoria and the 

Commonwealth have co-operated to special advantage. Some time ago 

the `ommonwealth undertook to find. £1 for every £2 that the States 

spent on the construction of mental hospitals. There was a quota 

for each State and a limit beyond which the Commonwealth subsidy 
would not 'be paid. Victoria is the only State in the Commonwealth 

to take full advantage of this Commonwealth offer. New South Wales, 

for instance, has spent a much smaller sum on mental hospitals and has 

only attracted 39% instead of 100% of the Commonwealth grant made 

for this purpose.
              However, that is enough     National Health from an 

Australia-wide point of view. This present Appeal is a personal 

affair and it affects intimately each person living in this Glenelg 

region. One of the man advantages of maintaining a place in the
finances of hospitals   ofprivate contributions and donations is

that it gives the average citizen the feeling - "This is my 

hospital" or "This is the hospital that belongs to my district." 

Such a feeling makes people much more concerned as to how the 

hospital is run, to see that it is efficiently managed, and to 

see that the service that is given patients in that hospital is 

the best possible service that can be given sick people.

                                                                      -5 -

                                This feeling of hospitals belonging to the people in 
whose areas they are found is, of course, greatly reinforced by the 
fact that hospitals are largely run by voluntary committees of 
public-minded citizens who donate their time to the service of their 
own particular community.
                                I think I should repeat this present hospital Appeal 
which will be running continuously until December lj.th, concerns 
the Hamilton Base Hospital, and the Macarthur, Coleraine, Qasterton, 
Penshurst, Merino, Skipton, Portland                                                         . +'r; _ a district hospitals.
Each hospital                             put in a candidate for the "Miss Glenelg" Radio 
Appeal, around whom various functions will be organised in the 
coming weeks. The more people of the different regions who support 
these functions, the better their hospitals will be served.
                                People wishing to make donations to this Appeal which 
is organised each year by this Station should contact their local 
hospital.
                                I an proud to have been asked to launch this Appeal 
for this year. I am sure, as in the past, the Appeal will be most 
successful. It is worth noting that, in these things, the Australian 
public is generally most patriotic and individuals in the past have 
not hesitated to make donations for worthy causes. I believe that 
people in the Glenelg region will not be lagging h*nd. Indeed, 
the standard of hospitalisation and services, p3 the people in this 
area is direct evidence that public appeals in this part of the 
country have been very well met in the past. However, if we want 
our hospital standards to continually improve, this Annual Appeal 
must continue to be well supported.
                                I have great pleasure in declaring this 1960 Appeal 
officially open and leave the matter in the capable hands of each 
individual.

J
n~  
CI
7:1
CA 012= HN5 =
-	
i
3
ce
~  
w
w  
l'-
M NI AT1ON
11111ta1iEllít
•	
vnbHlsn.
HAMILTON VIC 18 9-28A
IIALCOLr+i FRASER
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
CANBERRA ACT
PARIICIPATINQ HOSPITALS MACARTHUR COLERAINE CASTERTON PENSHURST  
MERINO HAMILTON SKIPTON PORTLAND HEYWOOD ... 3HA  
C3HA ) 38


