<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary procedure
Description: press statement
Date: 12/06/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   STATSWINTs             June 12th, 960
auLCOLX FRASER 
              PAthWYÂRY PA
     Hello, ladies and gentlemen.
     When members are first elected to the House of Representatives 
they are often baffled by the procedure that the House follows in carrying 
out its business.
     New members are given the book of Standing Orders, which shows 
in detail all the rules which must be followed to keep Parliament function- 
ing smoothly. Many of these rules, on first sight, appear to have no 
reason. Many of the others, on the other hand, are very obvious and ones 
which clearly assist in the maintenance of order and in the progress of 
debates and in the despatch of business.
     There are some members who might remain in the Parliament for 
20 years, but a member will never get a time understandingof the Standing 
Orders and of the procedure of the Parliament unless he takes some time to 
look into the history of why the rules and the procedures are what they are.
     No matter what the politics of a member of Parliament you will 
find every member extremely reluctant to change the rules under which 
Parliament itself operates. That is one of the main reasons why we, in our 
Parliament, have many rules which bad an extremely good and valid reason 
perhaps as much as 250 years ago, but which are now merely part of the 
tradition of Parliament. This itself is a good thing because the
stability of Parliamentary Government is deep rooted in our history, and 
anything that can be done to maintain the traditions of the past and which 
will help to remind ourselves of the struggles of the early Parliamentarians 
200 or 300 years ago is well worth keeping.
     Many of our rules, that is the rules of the House of Representatives 
are taken pretty well directly from the rules of the House of Commons. 
That is why the language of our standing orders is, to the modern our, very 
often old—fashioned.
     The rules of Parliamentary procedure place great store on what I 
suppose one could call Parliagentary good manners. There is a great deal 
in the rules which is designed to prevent members getting into heated and 
personal argument. That is why all members direct their remarks to the 
Speaker. It is quite out of order to say "you" or to say "Eddie Ward, you

                               2
shouldn't have done that  One must say "Nr. speaker, the honorable
member for at Sydney", and then one can go on to criticise in the 
way that one likes.
      Going back to the early days when the King st a great 
deal of power in the Parliament there evolved modes of procedure which 
were designed in such a way as not to offend the Royal Personage or 
his representative. In the early days the Speaker was generally 
appointed by the King; he was the King's personal representative 
and he was there to look after the interests of the Crown. It was 
certainly considered impolite to object to anything directly that the 
Crown wished to do and, therefore, when member of the original House 
of Commons wiahed to oppose a certain measure they evolved formulas which 
would not offend the Crown. If you want to oppose a motion or a Bill 
you don't, after you have made your remarks, get up bluntly and say 
"no, I won't have tide"; you don't move an amendment saying that the 
thing is nonsense and that we will have none of it. on the other hnns 
the Speaker very often puts the question in this way —
 The motion is that the words proposed to be omitted stand part of the 
queetion".
This was a formula evolved in the early days of Parliamentary procedure 
for the sole purpose of not offending the Crown. The sane form of 
words is still used.
      There are other things which onlookers find it difficult to 
understand.
      There are three readings of the Bill, The first reading is 
purely formal j on the second reading we have the main debate in which 
people make their main speeches. After the second reading the Bill 
goes into Committee stages where it is dealt with clause by clause. 
If it passes through the second reading in Committee Stages it is then 
read a third tine and voted on a third time as a whole, and this is 
purely a formal procedure so far as we are concerned.
      However, in the early days, there were very good reasons for these 
three readings of a Bill. A Bill was announced, then it was read, 
and there had to be considerable delays before it was read again to 
enable all members to study the Bill properly. In the early days of

                   .. 3
 Parliament in England there were no roads. The horse of a member of 
 Parliament might founder on its way from the Provinces; it might rain
 or he might get bogged; he might get snowed up and unable to reach 
 Westminster. Therefore, the early Parliamentarians evolved this
 process of the three readings, with delays between each reading, real 
 delays to give members an opportunity to get to the House of Commons 
 so that they could consider the Bill and cast their vote.
     Under prevent circumstances much of the procedure of passing a 
 Bill has no meaning except in the traditional sense, but it is worth 
 keeping the ancient form to remind us of what used to happen in the 
 early days of Parliamentary Government.
     There is one other item of procedure which for us again doesn't 
 have a great deal of meaning, but which was most importi:nt and which 
 even affected members' lives in the early days of Parliament.
     When the Speaker was the representative of the King, if members 
 spoke too plainly or too bluntly in opposition to a certain measure
 they often found they were sent to the Tower, and not infrequently
 their heads were cut off. The House of Commons, therefore, tried to 
 evolve a procedure to get the Speaker out of the Chair and out of the 
 Parliament so that he could not hear what was going on. Therefore,
 in the early days it was decided that Financial Bills should be dealt 
 with in what was called the Committee of Supply or the Committee of 
 Ways and leans. These were Committees of the whole House of Commons,
 and they were the Committees which decided how much money the King 
 should have or how the money that was going to be granted to the ling 
 should be raised. When these money measures were debated in the
 Committee of Supply or the Committee of Ways and means a Chairman from 
 the Commons itself was looking after the debate and the Speaker was
 not allowed to be in the Chamber. The Speaker, strictly speaking,
 was not meant to knoe what people had said and could not send people 
 to the Tower.
     The evolution of Parliamentary Government as we know it is, I 
believe, a fascinating and romantic story. When we look at the cold
 rules of procedure as they are set out in our book of Standing Orders 
we often forget the early struggles and difficulties that the early

             4

Parliamentarians had in winning author:My for the people of a 
country over the Crown. When we look into the meaning, into the 
history O the origin of some of the standing orders which, in 
our day and age, appear obscure we find written the fascinating 
story of this struggle, the story of early Parliamenvarians to 
whom we all owe a great deal. In the true sense these men come 
first in democracy.

