<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1963/64 Budget
Description: press statement
Date: 8/09/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


'



      PRESS STATEMENT:

      MALCOLM FRASER :

                                                         September 8th,1963


                                    1963/64 BUDGET


                      In making this report I have been trying to estimate the
      most significant aspects of the Budget debate. It has been difficult to 
      find any constant-thread of criticism. This is, perhaps, natural because 
      most members of Parliament, and this includes the Opposition, all have 
      their own particular projects which they like to advocate as much as 
      possible. Very often, unless the Government is under extreme criticism, 
      the Budget debate turns into a forum in which Member after Member gets 
      up speaking on certain matters which may be important but which are not 
      necessarily directly related to the Budget.

                      There was, I think, one aspect which all Members of 
      Parliament emphasised in differing ways.. That is the question of national
•     development and the need to do as much as is humanly possible to develop 
      Australia as rapidly as possible. This last Budget makes a reasonable 
      contribution to assist in the process of national development.

                      After drawing attention to the fact that our gross 
      national product had increased 8% in the year, the Treasurer went on to 
      announce measures that were designed to give a further boost to national 
      development in certain particular spheres.

                      The Government's philosophy about this is that the 
      Government should do those things that private individuals cannot do 
      for themselves but that, in undertaking a certain activity, the Govern- 
      ment should, at the same time, open the way for further initiative and 
      development by private citizens.

                      The Snowy Mountains Scheme, which has won world fame, is
      a classic example of this.   The water is dammed by the Snowy Mountains
      Authority,   It is made available for producing hydro-electric power 
      which is used in the homes and factories of New South Wales and Victoria.
•     Secondly, it is made available to the irrigation farmers on the Murray and 
      Murrumbidgee irrigation valleys where additional millions of acre feet 
      have been made available as a result of the Scheme.

                      Although the engineering works involved were on a massive 
      scale, the Snowy Mountains project as a whole was one that did not present 
      Governments with any real problems. The reason for this is simple. It 
      was always known what the power would be used or what the water would be 
      used for and therefore it was only a question of building the dams and 
      constructing the giant turbines to make the water and the power available. 
      Many ether national projects do not come into this category. These are 
      ones that require, sometimes, years of painstaking research before you 
      can achieve spectacular results. Examples of this can be found in the 
      Northern Territory and in the Kimberleys.

                      Only a few weeks ago, the Prime Minister opened the 
      diversion dam on the Ord River which cost £5M. This will make it 
      possible to irrigate 15,000 acres and farmers are already being selected
      for the first farms.   Several crops can be grown in the Kimberleys - 
      rice, sugar, cotton, safflower and peanuts - to name but a few. However, 
      it is not just a question of growing something. You then have to be able 
      to sell it at a price that will give the farmer a good livelihood. It 
      has been demonstrated fairly conclusively that rice, peanuts and safflower 
      in themselves do not offer much chance of success.


                                                                      /2.

                                      — 2 —


                      The West Australian Government is pinning its main hope
      on the economic development of cotton farming in this area. C.S.I.R.O. 
      has proved that the Kimberley region can grow the best cotton in the 
      world under irrigation but there have been tremendous problems with
      insects and disease.  In recent years, C.S.I.R.O. has been tackling this 
      problem, trying to develop some cheap means of pest control. In the 
      initial stages the cost of the insecticides needed to keep the cotton crop 
      free from pests would have made cotton farming quite uneconomical.

                      All this demonstrates the fact that in difficult areas 
      like the Kimberleys you cannot rush in, build the dams and suddenly say: 
      "We are going to irrigate half a million acres." You have got to know
      precisely where you are going before you act.  If this large scale 
      experiment which involves the irrigation of 15,000 acres is successful, 
      there will be no problem involved in building much larger dams on both 
      the Ord and the Fitzroy Rivers and irrigating up to a quarter of a million
      acres or more. This is the great hope for the Kimberley region.   It is 
      too early yet to say that there will not be further difficulties but now 
      everyone involved in the project is much more optimistic than they ever 
      have been.
•
                      There is no doubt that if this initial Ord River experiment 
      is successful, the other major development projects will not be held up 
      for lack of finance. Meanwhile, the Commonwealth Government is making 
      special grants to the Western Australian Government so that the road 
      network and other facilities in the Kimberley region can be rapidly improved. 
      Port facilities will be developed at Derby and Broome and by these means 
      progress is being made over the whole region.

                      There is an outstanding problem remaining, however. Up 
      to the present time, the only really important industry in the Kimberley 
      region has been the cattle industry. So far, the people experimenting 
      on the Ord River have not found the means of blending the farming develop- 
      ments that are going to take place with the cattle industry. My own view 
      is that the farming areas must find a way of producing good fattening feed 
      either by irrigated pasture or by other means so that the Kimberley cattle 
      growers can sell their cattle sooner and fatten them quicker„ By this 
      means they will get a higher price for their product and would be encouraged
•     to introduce better blood stock.

                      I would like to give one other example of how painstaking 
      research is essential before other developments can follow. At the present 
      time, the Department of Territories is calling for farmers to take up 3 
      experimental farm blocks near the Adelaide River township in the Northern 
      Territory. These farmers will fatten cattle partly on native pasture, 
      partly on improved pasture and partly on irrigated pasture. They will 
      also grow some rice. The experiment is designed to prove or disprove
      techniques worked out at the Katherine Research Station.   Nearly £200,000 
      has been spent in research directly related to the sort of things that 
      these farmers will be doing.. If this £200,000 had not been spent it would 
      still have been possible to make this country available to farmers but they 
      would have had no idea what to do with their farms once they were given to 
      them. Again, if these initial farms are successful this will open the way 
      to a moderately large scale development. This just goes to show that in 
      these areas of Northern Australia it is not possible to wave a magic wand 
      that will give an easy answer to the problems of development. Painstaking
      research and effort is required.   This is the first prerequisite.
      Successful research and the adaptation of it can, however, open the way
      for large scale experiments and development.     It is my belief that 
      the research undertaken in the last 10 to 15 years is shortly going to 
      pay off in this northern region.


                                                                     /3

                  3


          Meanwhile, the Government is spending many millions of 
  pounds in different areas across the north developing cattle roads, 
  improving facilities and doing those things that Governments must do 
  before proper development by private people can be begun. This, of 
  course, has involved very close co-operation with Western Australia and 
  Queensland, and I believe all three Governments deserve praise for the 
  way they have co-operated in this difficult task of deciding what to 
  do with the northern areas of Australia,



                  o0o


•

