<!--start metadata-->
Title: Postal increases
Description: press statement
Date: 3/04/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


s PUSS STATHRENT                                    April 3rd:1960
 pi-ì+CaLx ?RAS=
                            POSTAL INC   RS
          Last creek the an si report of the Poa teru-General' a
 Department was released. This showed that there had been a profit of 
 between E6 million and £7 million on the running costs of the Department 
  in the year 1958/59.
          When they saw this many people have obviously asked the
  question - why then did the Government in the last Be et sweariou inn.,reaee 
  postal rates? There is a clear answer to this.
            For rramy years the Postmaster-General's Department's accounts
 have not been kept in a proper fashion. A normal business undertaking 
  deducts certain items for depreciation and interest on capital
  expenditure before declaring a profit. So far as the Poetmaster. 
  General"e Department is concerned no allowance bas been made for 
  depreciation of its assets, and no allowance has been made for interest
  on the capital that has been spent.  If these two things were taken 
  into account it is highly probable that the so called profit of the 
  Department would be turned into a loss.
             However, to ascertain the, true position at the time of the
  last Dtxdget the Government appointed a special Committee of Enquiry to 
  examine the Postmaster-Gemillers Department's accounts to see what 
  changes should be made in the accounting method. This is the 
  treasury point of view; it is one that is bard to argue against on 
  straight business lines,
              However, I might be able to put the position more clearly
  so far as the normal subscribers are aonoerned. The Department spende
  in all on running costa and on capital expenditure about £140 million
  a y€gar. The Department receives in return from the subscribers and
  in revenue of all kinds about f120 million a year there is a gap
  here of about £20 million which must come from the taxpayers funds.
  If charges were tower more money would have to come from taxpayers
  funds, if chgrgee were higher less would come from taxpayers funds.
              It is quite true that the charges made more than *over
  immediate running expenses, and that therefore those who use the services
  of the Department are making sons contribution to future capital expansion
  by way of new automatic telephone services, additional trunk line

                           2
channels, new exchanges and b,a tter facilitiee generally.
       I was aaksd the other day ...thy shot .d the present users of the
       is services pay for future development? Why can't the money 
come from Loan Funds in what could be regarded se the proper fashion? 
This would be a gourd argument if the Government were able to raise 
Loan Funds for terse purposes.
        However. ,, as you know, for the last ten years every penny and 
every farthing of loan funds that have been raised have been handed over 
to the States for their own loan projects for the State Capital works 
of different kinds. Because of the extremely rapid rote of development 
in Australia the loan mmrket has just not released sufficient funds to 
cover all the developmental needs of different Government agencies, 
either State or Federal. The Commonwealth Government, therefore, has 
been forced into the position of paying for its capital works out of 
current revenue. This sort of thing has occurred in nearly every country 
which has undertaken extremely rapid development.
        Furthermore, every generation of Australis ever since this 
country was first founded, have put more into the development of this 
country for the future than they have taken out, and if we, of our 
generation, are to play our part ia making Australia a stronger country 
for the future we met do the same. This principle applies to the 
Postmaster—General's Department as it does to all National Development.
        Since the Poatater-General's Department must puy for its 
future capital expansion either from the money it gets from its
aubseribers an(( the users of its services, or from increased taxation, 
it doesn't seam to make a great deal of difference where the money actually
emirs from. Every person in Australia, or pretty well every person, 
uses the telephone, and pretty well every person is a taxpayer. In large 
measure the two groups are the same.
         I would be fully prepared to admit that if the choice were 
between the subscribers paying for capital development or the development 
being paid for by loan funds then that would be a different matter, but 
that is not the choice — the choice is whether the subscribers and users 
of the services are going to 'eke some contribution to future capital 
development or whether all the money for future capital development is

going to come from taxation sources.
             The Government believes that the users of the services
should meke   e contribution, and that the people generally should also
make an additional contribution through taxation. At the present time 
this additional contribution is about £20 million.
              If you like you can look at it this wuy, he you pay for 
pour 'phone calls, or when you spend 54. to buy an ordinary postago otamp, 
you are not only paying the Departmeut what it oasts to give you service 
in this direction, you are also making a email oontribution to the 
Future development of the Potirtmoster-General'a Jepartment. That mono 
that part of what you pay iì a direot contribution to the many things 
which the Department must do if it is to supply the needs of an ever 
expanding Australia.
               If we are not going to pay for some of these services 
and for some of the capital development we must have through the present 
postal charges then we will have to pay for these same things through
blgher taxation.   Therefore, I don't believe that this argument as 
to where the money canes from is one of real substance.
                Contusion has arisen over these issues in the last 
few days very larglly because of the fact that the so called profit 
that has been published and which has been attributed to the Department, 
takes no account whatsoever of the future capital needs, and it takes 
no account of the depreciation of exosting assets of the Department.

