<!--start metadata-->
Title: Primary industry, Australian Wheat Board
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 4/11/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 C
                                                                     14-





           RADIO BROADCAST                  Sunday, 4th November   3HA
           THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.    Thursday, 8th November 3YB



           Once again, primary industry is on the receiving end of 
           the Government's authoritarian fist. The Government's 
           action in overriding the Australian ~~'heat Board and 
           forcing it to sell wheat to Egypt on terms and 
           conditions dictated by the Government against the 
           considered commercial judgement of the Board, is 
           yet another example of an abuse of power. I am also 
           advised that the Government is requiring the Board 
           to carry a certain amount of the insurance risks on 
           its own account. That basically means the growers 
           themselves will be carrying the insurance risks if there 
•          if any forfeiture of payment by Egypt.
           Apparently, primary producers are not only going to 
           be used as instruments of foreign policy, they are 
           going to have to pay the cost as well.

           There is no limit to where this principle could lead. 
           If the Government persists in forcing its will on bodies 
           such as the Wheat Board, it will destroy all confidence 
           of farmers in the statutory organisations established 
           to market their products to the best advantage. For 
           example, there must now be doubts about the terms of 
           recent sales of wool and wheat to China.

           Inevitably there must be a danger that the Government 
           will be tempted to appoint 'yes men' to Boards, rather 
           than run the risk that they will have political pressure 
           put upon them and be exposed as a result.

•          By embarking on this course of deliberate interference, 
           the Government has forfeited all rights to claim the 
           confidence of primary producers. This is against the 
           interests of producers and of the community.

           The role of the Monarch in our constitution is sometimes 
           not fully recognised.• It has evolved over centuries, It 
           provides a most valuable safeguard to our particular 
           form of democratic Government.

           Recent events in the United States have demonstrated 
           in a dramatic way the advantages of separating the Head 
           of State from the day to day business of Government 
           and from the electoral processes involved in periodic 
           changes of Government.

           It has become clear to the world that there are very real 
           advantages in having a Head of State quite divorced from 
           political consideration, even though that Head of State 
           has only limited and quite clearly defined powers.

   •






                    2





      But there are other less tangible reasons why we should 
      retain our links with the Crown. The British Commonwealth 
      of Nations, the successor to the old British Empire, is 
      a remarkable, even unique, organisation. Even though it is 
      a loose association of nations without any power to 
      enforce decisions on its members, it provides the only 
      forum in which countries of all races, with Governments 
      of all political complexions, can come together to 
      discuss problems and hopefully to evolve policies to their 
      mutual advantage.


      The bond that binds these countries may be a nebulous 
      one in some respects, but it does have a very real and 
      human personification in the Queen. She is the link, the 
      symbol, which maintains the British Commonwealth, the 
      only organisation of its kind in recorded human history.
 •
      It is always a major occasion when the Queen pays a visit 
      to Parliament, especially as her official title is now 
      Queen of Australia.


      Most Commonwealth Departments and Authorities present 
      their Annual Reports to Parliament at about this time 
      each year, and one of the most interesting is always 
      that of the C.S.I.R.O..


      This year's report covers an even wider field than usual 
      and is a reminder that this organisation is in the 
      forefront of world research in many areas.


      In primary industry, subjects under investigation include 
      the possibility of being able to cull merino breeding 
      stock at weaning time by studyin° a wool follicle 
      curvature, protecting stored grain, the method of measuring 
      wool fineness by sound waves, and using goats to clear 
•     scrub land.


      Some other research projects are a radically new type 
      of influenza vaccine which it is hope will prove 
      effective a ainst any strains that arise between now 
      and 1978, using solar energy to kiln dry timber, 
      clearning smoke from Power Stations, and studying 
      radio signals from stars at a great distance from 
      earth.


      In all these fields we are up with the latest work in 
      the world, and in many cases, are ahead of any other 
      country.

