<!--start metadata-->
Title: Prime Ministers' conference, common market implications
Description: press statement
Date: 23/09/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       r s          A n *, ~ r-n
           ~S~'1:_~:.~.' ~•' ; 1


   MALCOLNí FRASrR;



                                                                                                                September 23rd, 1962




                                                    PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE


                                                    COMMON MARKET IMPLICATIONS




                             Some days ago the Prime Minister, the Minister for Trade and the 
  Treasurer went to England for the Frime Ministers' Conference. While at one 
  time it had been hoped that the final draft terms for the proposed British 
  entry into the E.L.C. might be known before this Conference began, it is now 
  clear that the Prime Ministers will only be able to discuss a vague outline. 
  The negotiations with the six Common Market countries are not completed and 
  the final details are still not known. This may make it difficult for the 
  Prime Ministers to come to any final decision as to how British entry to the
  E.E.C. might affect the trade of their own individual countries .                                                                          It will be 
  difficult for the Prime Ministers to 3_isouss the imuact of Britain's joining 
  the E.E.C. in detail because each Prime Minister has different problems.


                            There was a time when the Prime Ministers' Conference involved 
  five Prime Ministers; UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. 
  Now, as we know, South Africa no longer takes part but the total number of 
  Prime Ministers at this Conference will be sixteen and most of them will have 
  trading problems quite different from Australia's. Therefore any general 
  discussions the Prime Ministers will have will involve sixteen different 
  countries, all with different spheres of interest. This will add to the 
  difficulties of coming to a general conclusion.


                            The fact that there are sixteen different Prime Ministers at this 
  Conference where just after the war there were only five, illustrates how the
  Commonwealth of Nations, which in 1945 was still called the British Empire, has                                                                British Empire, has 
  changed. In one decade we tend to look upon it in terms of what it was in the 
  previous decades. There are still many people who look upon the Commonwealth 
  of Nations as the original five white Dominions. Such people forget that the 
  white nations and the white races are both very much in the minority in the 
  present Commonwealth of Nations.


                      It has been said that the Commonwealth of Nations will be changed
  if Britain joins the E.E.C. It certainly will be changed but that is not
necessarily a criticism. The change could be to the advantage of the 
  Commonwealth of Nations and to Europe. Different members of the Commonwealth 
are not bound together by colour,by race, by religion, by foreign policy or by 
defence treaties; while they all recognise the Queen as Head of the Commonwealth 
they do not all recognise as we do, that the Queen is their own Sovereign, 
However, the Commonwealth is bound together by mutual respect for the independence 
of member nations and also by the informal discussions which take place between 
the Heads of Governments of the different countries. These informal discussions 
are, I believe, most valuable and Britain's accession to the Treaty of Rome
would in no way alter these discussions. It is stated that the Commonwealth is 
tied together by trade treaties and that Britain's accession to the Treaty of 
Rome will alter this. British entry would certainly alter trade relationships, 
but I doubt if trade is at the centre of the Commonwealth's Association. Ever 
since the first Ottowa agreement was signed in 1932, the proportion of our trade 
that we do with the U.K. has fallen.


                           For example in 1932-33, over 41% of our imports came from the U.K.,
and 55%-56% of our exports went. to the U.K. Now we get just over 30% of our 
imports from the U.K. and the U.K. takes less than 20% of our exports. The 
proportion of our exports that the U.K. takes now as comupared to the early 
thirties, has fallen to one-third of what it used to be. The difference has 
been made up by markets in Japan; twelve years ago Japan took under 2% of our 
exports, and last year took nearly 18%. Twelve years ago the United States took 
6% of our exports and last year took 10%. Our United States exports have



                                                                                                                                                    /2.

•  f



                                              2  41110.


         doubled from £39M. to £98M, over the last two years.   Our exports to Japan
         rose by £31M. from £l42Mto £173M, Our trade with the Pacific and Asian 
         countries has been increasing, not only in major markets of Japan and the 
         U.S., but also in the smaller markets such as Hong Kong, India, Ceylon,Burma, 
         Thailand and the Phillipines. The U.S. has become our third best customer.

                  While we have been expanding our trade in these areas, despite 
         vigorous promotion campaigns our trade with the U.K. has continued to fall. 
         Last year the U.K. bought £188M. worth of goods from us, hardly more than 
         Japan, and this was £25M. less than the year before. The plain fact of the 
         matter is that our markets in Europe and the U.K., despite the most vigorous 
         efforts of the Department of Trade, have been sinking both proportionately and 
         absolutely, and our markets in other countries have been increasing,

                  Looked at it this perspective it can be seen that the British 
         accession to the Treaty of Rome would not be a calamity for Australia. It may 
         hasten trends that have been growing in any case. This is not to say that the 
         effect on individual industries could not be of the utmost importance to those 
         industries; some industries like John McEwen's dried fruits in the Murray 
         Valley and the dairy industry which are of vital importance in their own areas,
         are likely to suffer,    if the U.K. Can't negotiate better terms with the Six, 
         and if the U.K. still joins the E.E.C. It is to safeguard the outlets for these 
         industries that the Government has devoted its major attention.

                  I have said more than once that Britain should join for political 
         reasons, not just for her own interests but also in the interests of our own
         long term security.    It may well be that despite the skill of the British 
         negotiators,and despite the pressures of the Australian Government, the 
         Common Market countries may not give fully adequate concessions to protect
         some of our sensitive exports.    If this does happen, and if Britain still 
         joins - as for political reasons she should - then quite clearly it is up to 
         the Australian Government to carry the cost of re-organization for any
         industry that may be affected.    Individual industries need have no fears that 
         they will be left in the lurch by the Australian Government. The Prime 
         Minister has stated in the Parliament that the Government will stand by the 
         industries that are affected, and there is a determination by those who have 
         an appreciation of rural problems to see that it does.

