<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool marketing
Description: For press
Date: 1/05/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


v    FOR PRESS                     70

          The impressive show of unity by woolgrowers for a single 
     marketing authority to handle disposal of the total wool clip should 
     not be allowed to falter, the Member for Wannon and Minister for 
     Defence, Mr. Malcolm Fraser said today.
          He appealed to the industry to continue the momentum 
     that had arisen in recent weeks.
          He expressed the hope that opinion favouring the principle 
     of a single marketing authority would be maintained and that no time 
     would be lost in developing proposals which had been put forward.
          He was commenting on the problems confronting the 
     industry following an address he gave to 1400 growers at Narrandera 
     recently.
          Mr. Fraser said he had been impressed at the dramatic 
     gathering of support shown over recent weeks for a tingle marketing 
     authority.
          Three thousand growers meeting at Moree (NSW) on March 
     21st had resolved to press for a 'single marketing authority with the 
     necessary powers to administer the efficient marketing and distribution 
     of the entire wool clip'.
          The resolution went on —
           That the Authority ensures that wool complexes, 
           modern transport and handling methods, objective 
           measurement and sale by sample and utilised to the 
           fullest extent.
           That the matters incorporated in this motion be given 
           immediate priority by the Australian Wool Board, 
           woolgrower organisations and the Australian Government.

          The Tamworth meeting had followed, and now the voice of 
     the growers at Narrandera had added to the rising tide of unity.
          State woolgrower organisations which had adopted the 
    resolution or similar resolutions were the United Graziers' Association 
    of Queensland, the N.S.W. Graziers' Association, the Victorian Farmers 
    Union and the Farmers Union of W.A.
          Two major woolgrower organisations — the Australian 
    Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council and the Australian Wool and Meat 
    Producers' Federation had resolved to support the proposal.

                            ../2

	                                2.

               A meeting of the Australian Wool Industry Conference unanimously
       adopted a motion moved by the A.W.G.C. in the same terms as the Moree resolution.
               The Conference resolution was being referred to the Advisory Committee 
       of the Australian Wool Board to work out a detailed plan.
               Mr. Fraser said he understood the concern and fear among woolgrowers 
       and this had been emphasised by meetings such as the one at Narrandera.
               The Prime Minister and the entire Government were concerned at the 
       industry's plight.
               The industry was of continuing vital importance to Australia, on 
       both social and economic grounds. Many wool growing areas were not able to 
       switch.to other forms of production, and the industry along with other primary 
       industries provided more than 60 per cent of our export income.
               Aid provided in the past had been substantial, but this had been 
       counteracted by a catastrophic fall in wool prices.
               Future assistance would need to come through a assistance with bank
       finance, taxation concessions, subsidies assisting production or in the
         organisation of the industry such as pressure for a single marketing authority. 
               Solutions to the industry's problems were not going to be easy to
       find, and in this search the historic bases on which the industry operated 
       were under challenge.
               The auction system as now constituted had broken down, particularly 
       over the past 12 months.
               On past occasions when referendums were held on marketing of the 
      Australian clip, Mr Fraser said, he had been in the minority.
               He stood prepared now to devote his energies and to give the strongest
      support of which he was capable, in co-operation with the industry, towards 
      implementation of a single marketing authority.
              The Government was ready to examine proposals coming forward, and it 
      was doing its own thinking on how to restore the industry.
              Mr. Fraser said the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Doug Anthony, 
      had pledged the assistance of his Department in the moves now under way.
              The Department of Primary Industry stood ready to help the wool industry
      organisations and the Australian Wool Board in tie preparation of proposals 
      that might be 'practical, workable and sensible'.
              The industry could well be on the threshold of the most far-reaching 
      reforms for a hundred years.
              As details developed in the growing moves for a single authority,
      he hoped there would be continuing unity throughout the wool industry, Mr. 
      Fraser said.

Mr. Fraser said, If there is additional assistance in the future it is 
likely that it would have to come through assistance with bank finance, 
taxation concessions, subsidies assisting production and in the
-organisation of the industry. I have no doubt that the industry will be 
putting various matters to the Government which meanwhile is doing its
own thinking."

