<!--start metadata-->
Title: Banking
Description: radio talk
Date: 8/11/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


5—MINUTE TALK BY MALCOLM FRA SER: MEMBER FOR WANNON 0/111 /..57.
            BANKI N G.
    Last week, the Treasurer introduced the Government's Banking 
legislation. It is no exaggeration to say that it is the most important 
legislation that has been introduced in this 2arliament since I have 
been a Member. Banking affects every Australian. In one form or 
another we are all customers of some bank and general banking policy 
affects the whole nation.
    The Government's legislation does four most important things. 
It separates the,P — 4. Bank and Trading Bank departments of 
the Commonwealth Bank into two now institutions to be called the 
Reserve Bank and the Commonwealth Bank Corporation. Secondly, it 
alters and strengthens the system of reserves that all Trading Banks 
must keep with the Rosarvc Bank; thirdly it establishes a new 
Development Bank that will be of immense significance in country 
areas, and fourthly, it widens the Commonwealth Savings Bank's power 
in relation to housing loans. I'll speak of the Development Bank 
and of the Savings Bank in later talks. Tonight I want to deal with 
other aspects of the legislation.
    In the last few years in Australia, and for many, many years 
in England, it has boon the custom for the private Trading Banks to 
keep a portion of their reserves in the hands of a central body. In 
England that body is the Bank of England which was finally taken over 
by the British Government in 1945. In Australia, the body has been 
the Central Banking Department of the Commonwealth Bank and which, 
after the passing of this present legislation, will be called the 
Reserve Bank. This system of the Government's making it necessary 
for private banks to keep a proportion of their reserves in the 
Government institutions achieves two most important objectives. It 
makes sure that the private banks have adequate reserves in the event 
of any emergency which, in Australia, for instance, could be caused 
by a severe drought or a fall in the price of wool and, at the same 
time, it gives the Government power to impose a restraint on bank 
lending when it is necessary, for instance, in a time of inflation 
and also and perhaps more importantly, it makes it ,mpossible for 
the Government to encourage more bank lending if there is any sign

              -2—

of deflation or unompl oymcnt.
    In Australia, tho Governmcnt will, under the new legislation, 
do this by altering the size of the reserve. If the reserve stands 
at 20% of deposits that Trading Banksmust hold in the Roserve Bank 
and if the Government wishes to encourage Bank lending, it can docrcase 
the amount of reserve that must be hold to, soy, 17 or 18% and this 
then gives the Trading Banks more' money for their own.purposes. This 
procodure is being altorcd from the ono which was prevolont under 
tho old banking lcgislatior?. Under the old logislation, the Control 
Bank could call in the reserves of any one bank without calling in 
the reserves of other banks. This provision could have been open to 
abuse because one bank could be penalised and driven out of business. 
Now, under the now legislation, all banks must be treated alike. 
If the reserve must be 18% for one bank it must be 18% for all banks, 
including, of course, the Commonwealth Trading Bank.
    T ho other most important feature of the legislation is this. 
Under the old legislation, the Governor of the Central Bank and the 
Governor of the Commonwealth Trading Bank was one and the same
 porson but he had two completely separate, and often conflicting 
functions. As Governor of the Control Bank his duty was to control 
 the volume and extant of bank landing so that banking institutions 
would maintain proper reserves with the Central Bank and play their 
 part in maintaining a stable economy. At the same time, as Governor 
 of the Commonwealth Trading Bank, ha had the obligation to extend 
 the Trading Bank's activities and to compote for business with the 
 other Trading Banks.
    Quite clearly, it is very hard for one parson with one hand 
 to control the Trading Banks and the general level of landing and 
 for the soma parson with the other hand to vigorously compote with 
 those Trading Banks. Under such circumstances, it is almost 
 impossible to gain the trust and co—operation of the private banks. 
 Under the now legislation, the two functions have boon modo complotoly 
 separate and different people will bo in charge of each. The Governor 
 of the Roserve Bank will have the job of maintaining the level of

               3—
   It is my hope that the now Development Bank will fulfill the 
need that has boon so badly wanted and that those people of courage 
and good character who wish to expand their production not only for 
thoir own benefit but for the benefit of Australia will be able to 
obtain finance from this now Development Bank after it opens its doors.
   At the beginning of this talk I said that the Development 
Bank represented a radical change in policy so far as primary
producers were concerned. This is true, and if the Governors of 
the Bank operate as we hope, it will be of untold advantage to 
Australia as a whole.

