<!--start metadata-->
Title: Economy
Description: electoral talk
Date: 14/02/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRIME MfN1STER


   FOR MEDIA       SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 14 1982



             ELECTORATE TALK


   With the Autumn Session of Parliament about to commence, 
   I would like to take the opportunity of speaking to you 
   about Australia's priorities and prospects, about the 
   challenges we face as a people over the coming months.
.  We need a proper perspective on our achievements in the 
   economic arena because the underlying strength of the
   Australian economy is great, and we have the right policies 
   in place to keep it well on course.

   We need to understand that Australia's economy has been 
   growing, while many other economies have been stagnant or 
   shrinking, and the OECD predicts further growth of over 3% 
   for Australia in 1982, compared with an OECD average of just 
   over 1%. We need to understand the consumer demand remains 
   strong. The value of retail sales last December was 13% 
   higher than in 1980. We need to understand that 83,000 
   new jobs were created in 1981, that the average unemployment 
   rate throughout 1981 was the lowest for four years, and that 
   while the January unemployment rate was too high, it was still
   below last year's January rate. We need to understand that 
   business expects continuing strong investment growth this 
   financial year, and that following the projected record of 
   $1.25 billion on petroleum exploration and development in
•  1981, the projected figures for 1982 almost doubles that 
   again to nearly $2.5 billion.

   We need to understand that this level of investment would 
   not occur unless there was confidence in Australia's economy. 
   We need to understand that over six years, the Commonwealth 
   has consistently held down its own spending, both in absolute 
   terms and as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product in a way 
   which our major trading partners have not rivalled, and that 
   the recent tightening of budgetary expenditure has been
   designed to maintain that overall restraint, especially in 
   the face of some unexpected large wage increases.

   We need to understand that real household disposable income
   after tax rose by nearly $3 billion in 1980/81, and that in
   the two years to last December quarter, average weekly earnings
   have increased by over $13 in real terms. We need to understand
   that total taxation revenue as a proportion of GDP, is lower
   in Australia than for all our major trading partners with the
   exception of Japan. And the Commonwealth budget deficit as a percentag
   of GDP has been less in Australia than that of all our major
   trading partners in 1979/80.

                          - 2 -





      There is no doubt whatever that Australia's position in relation 
      to economic management and development is the envy of many other 
      countries because we pioneered and stuck to policy approaches 
      which are increasingly widely recognised as appropriate in the 
      1980s. The Government's economic policy has the enduring objectives 
      of curbing inflationary pressures, achieving continuing
      private sector recovery, and gaining sustained improvements 
      in living standards for all Australians.


      There are obviously challenges and threats to these objectives,
      both at home and overseas, and the Government has been
      responding to these challenges. People are fed up with the
      kind of strikes and unreasonable wage demands which have been
      all too common, especially in the second half of the past year
      which have damaged our international competitiveness, have threatened
      investment, and have destroyed job prospects for many young people.
      e e were twice as many working days lost through strikes in
      the 1981 September quarter as in the corresponding period j`
      in 1980. The Minister for Industrial Relations, Ian Viner, 5 l~i
      is inging forward three measures to address the present
•     industrial situation, both immediately and in the longer
      term. I have no doubt that these measures are sound.
      They will help to equalise legal responsibilities and balance
      the bargaining positions of.unions and employers. And I believe
      the community will give them the support they deserve.


      Accelerating wages are the main danger to continued economic 
      recovery, and it is essential that all parties to wage 
      bargains exercise restraint. If wage rises are allowed to 
      exceed the capacity of the economy to pay, Australia will 
      price itself out of international markets, causing loss of 
      jobs and confidence. Consistent with its philosophy, the 
      Government supports wage settlements proceeding on an industry 
      by industry basis. The Government believes that employers and 
      unions bear the prime responsibility for wage settlements, 
      and agreements which ignore the total economic environment 
      can only lead to unemployment and lower growth.


SThe depressed condition of the world economy also poses 
      a challenge to Australia's economic position. The Australian 
      economy derives enormous benefit from overseas trade and 
      from access to overseas capital markets. At the same time, 
      if overseas economic conditions are poor, if overseas interest 
      rates are high, the Australian economy is bound to be effected. 
      The Government can't totally insulate the Australian economy 
      from the effects of overseas trading, but we can and already 
      have shaped our policies in response to the challenges that 
      they pose. One clear indication of the impact of poor economic 
      conditions overseas can be seen in our balance of payments 
      Because of our strong growth of real incomes, and the demands 
      created by resource development, our import bill has been rising 
      significantly, but because of depressed world trade, and falling 
      commodity prices, our export earnings have been falling. In this 
      connection, exchange rate management is critical. The Government's 
      approach in this area is one of a carefully managed exchange 
      rate with very gentle, sometimes almost imperceptible adjustments 
      according to the overall state of the balance of payments, 
      but also with an eye to other important considerations such 
      as inflationary implications.


                                               ../3

                                - J -



       We will continue to follow this practice,azd adjust the 
       exchange rate on a gradual basis in line with market 
       circumstances. The exchange rate has already been devalued 
       by 5% against the trade weighted index since early August 
       1981, and by 5.6% against the United States since early 
       December 1981. The Government recognises that economic 
       management is a continuing process of facing new circumstances, 
       anticipating new challenges and adapting to them.

       In the final analysis, the best service the Government can 
       provide to the Australian economy is to create conditions 
       conducive to sustained economic growth by continuing to bear 
       down on inflation and by minimising Government demands on the 
       private sector. This is the foundation on which are policies 
       are built and it provides the only basis for Australia's 
       continued economic success.




•
                             ---000---

















•

