<!--start metadata-->
Title: Closure of post offices, Labor Government
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 30/09/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR Ii:TFORiAIION OF PRESS GALLERY         EI'°iBARGO. Sunday,
                                           30 3epter ber


     WANNON ELECTORAL 1~ ATÿi E v1 BY THE HON. MALCOLM 
        FRASER, H.P. - SUNDAY, 30 September. 



    I have had some disturbing news for a number of communities
in this electorate.  During the Budget there was a general 
statement that the Postmaster-General was considering closing 
a number of non-official post offices and down-grading others. 
He is considering over the whole of Australia closing 1,000 
non-official post offices and down-grading 300.

    I have been able to find out from the Department that
19 non-official post offices in Wannon are involved and it is 
likely that three official post offices are being examined
for down-grading to non-official status. These three are
Macarthur, Merino and Penshurst.  These are all significant 
communities and it would be quite wrong to down-grade the
quality of service that is provided. It is probably even more 
disturbing. o find that 19 post offices are46 for closure, 
and the post offices concerned are:
    Bushfield             liepunga. West    Poolaigelo 
    Casterton :vest       ili nn.amite      Powers Creek 
    Cheram                I''louta j up     Spring Gardens
    Chetwynd.             ht. Richmond      Wallacedale 
    Iamilton North        Nareen            Wannon
    Lower Horton Creek    Herrin Nerrin 
    Mailors Flat          Nu~.: rabiel

    I am sorry to read out a long list like this, but I know 
that people who live in particular communities will want to 
know whether their own post office is involved.

    I have made the strongest representations I can to the 
Postmaster-General and I will Jo all I can to see that the 
decisions are reversed.

    Australian meat producers are still in suspense about the 
Government's reaction to the report by the Labor Members of 
the Parliamentary Prices Committee concerning a very heavy
export tax on a port beef.  I have already saidthat the 
sort of tax they have in mind is 12 which would_ raise about
$160 to $170 million a year.  The Government has made no 
decision about this matter.

                               2.

    The Minister for Primary industry, Ken Wreidt, whom I 
like very much as a person, has said that he personally is
opposed to the tax.  I an glad he has made this statement, 
because even -though he has broken Cabinet solidarity in making 
his personal opinion known before the matter is discussed in 
Cabinet, he has at least made it hard. for the Government to 
accept a thoroughly foolish decision.

    I know the kind, of advice that the Minister gets from his 
Department of Primary Industry, and if he has supported that 
advice in Cabinet discussions as I believe he often would have, 
he has clearly had a number of defeats throughout the course
of the last nine months.  Senator Wreid.t might have decided 
that this export meat tax was an issue on which he should stick
and not accept a further defeat.  If that is so, meat producers 
will be able to rest a little easier, at least until the city- 
based Labor Party prepares itself for another attack on the
rural economy.

    During the last week the Government pushed through both 
Houses of Parliament in one day and with a very few hours 
debate the proposals for a prices and incomes referendum.

    The Liberal Party will be opposing giving the Commonwealth
Government these additional powers.  We believe that the 
Commonwealth has ample power to reduce inflation to reasonable 
levels, especially if the Commonwealth is prepared to act in
concert and cooperation with the States. Both our Premier, 
Dick Hamer, and Sir Robert Askin have promised the fullest 
possible cooperation, and thus there is no need for more power 
being given to Canberra.

    I have always believed that a division of power is important,
and this is especially so when you see how power is used  At 
the moment there is a very severe power strike in New South
Wales which is causing hardship to a very large number of people. 
One of the newspapers reported a doctor being blacked out
while trying to save the life of a heart attack patient. That 
just shows how strikes of this kind come right down to 
personal hardship and difficulty in the home.

                                                         .../3

                                 ~
                                 ~•



    The Prime Minister has said that the Commonwealth will not 

intervene in this particular dispute because it is a State

matter in ::few South Wales. That would have been alright except 

for the fact that one of his Ministers has intervened.




    The •story is quite clear.   Last Sunday the Minister

directed. that the Snowy Mountains Council supply power to

New South Wales in accordance with the wishes of the striking

power unions.   He tried to keep this directive secret.    He 

tried to say that what he had done was because of flooding but, 

contrary to•the Prime Minister's statement that the Commonwealth 

has no right to intervene, the Minister for Minerals and Energy 

has intervened on the side of the striking power unions, on the 

side of industrial lawlessness, against the Industrial Commission 

in New South Wales, against the New South Wales Government, and 

against the people of New South Wales who are the ones who will

suffer.   In more detail this is what happened.




    The Chief Engineer on the Snowy Mountains got a demand from-

the unions to reduce power output.    The unions, who were in 

any case reducing power output for New South Wales stations, 

Wanted-this-action from the Snowy Mountains power stations so 

that their restrictions would be more severely felt in New 

South Wales, as they believed they would then have a greater 

possibility-of forcing the Government to accept a 35-hour week.




    The Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr. Connor, told

the Snowy Mountains Engineer to talk to the unions.    On the 

Sunday there was a vote of the Snowy Mountains Council, which

is responsible for the power producing operations.    They voted 

to continue supplying power to New South Wales normally.

After that vote was taken the Minister gave a directive to the 

Snowy Mountains Council to make sure that the Council only 

delivered power to New South Wales in accordance with the 

dictates of the power unions' 35-Hour Week Committee.




    The Minister has been evasive and I believe he has misled 

the Parliament because he did not take the action he did 

because of flooding, as his own letter, which I read into the

Hansard., has proved.  I have said the Minister ought to 

resign and I have also said the Parliament should be recalled 

so that it can debate the censure of the Minister which

now stands in the books of the Parliament.    This is a very

                               4.

serious matter and it shows how power can be used secretly to
the disadvantage of hundreds of-tlaousands of people. It is an 
abuse of power which ought not to be tolerated.

    As a result of the Minister's intervention, on the basis 
of advice available to me, power produced by the Snowy Mountains 
for New South Wales was reduced from a normal 1,200 megawatts 
to 200 megawatts last Monday.

    This doesn't only affect New South Wales, because Victoria
gets considerable power from the Snowy Mountains system.  If 
the Minister can intervene secretly and there are power cuts 
for New South Wales, in similar circumstances he can do the 
same sort of thing for Victoria.

