<!--start metadata-->
Title: Dr Cairns, Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 13/07/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL TALK For Sunday 13 July, 1975 3HA 
               & Thursday 17 July, 1975 3YB




THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER





The Opposition parties took their strong stand in Parliament 
over the Connor/Cairns loans affair on two major grounds: 
it believes the Government had sought to circumvent the 
Constitution and deceive the public, and it believes that 
the Government has shown colossal ineptitude.


As the tale has unfolded, one has begun to wonder whether 
this Government which is trying to run Australia is able to 
run a raffle.


The former Treasurer Dr. Jim Cairns, now sacked altogether 
from the Ministry, has shown how disastrous it is for a 
Minister of the Crown to allow his friends to select 
themselves.


He and his Government have been caught up with motley 
businessmen, one of whom has now declared himself to be a 
perjurer.

Dr. Cairns wore, he told the Parliament,his heart on his 
sleeve.

He might have added that while Treasurer, the second most 
important portfolio in the Ministry, he was also cavalier 
with his common sense, which he threw out the window.

Dr. Cairns did however have a dream, which after a certain 
amount of initial display while Minister for Overseas 
trade, he was able to keep to himself.

That was to set the Australian Industries Development 
Corporation up as a major instrument in securing public 
ownership of private industry.

His Bill to expand the powers of this body, to enable 
it to raise funds in Australia as well as overseas, and 
to expand the range of its activities, went through 
Parliament late in the Autumn Session. But Dr. Cairns 
did not tell the public that his proposals for the AIDC 
involved raising hundreds of millions of dollars to buy 
out business firms made vulnerable by the Labor Govern- 
ment's own economic policies and by its own mismanagement.


Dr. Cairns kept the dimensions of this dream of a 
socialist Australia quite secret.


The Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr. Connor, was 
also in pursuit of a dream, which was even more grandiose

                        ../

                                                       2:
and even more secret, than that of Dr. Cairns.

Who knows how much Mr. Connor wanted to borrow: according
to the documents which were given to the Parliament this 
last week, it could have been 2,000 million dollars, or 
4,000 million dollars, or 8,000 million dollars.

He began chasing this money through the Indian money broker 
introduced to him by Mr. Clyde Cameron, in November last 
year, a month before the Executive Council gave its invalid 
authorisation, and he was talking to Mr. Khemlani about a 
loan of 4,000 million dollars in March, a month after the 
amount authorised had been halved to 2,000 million dollars.

Nor has he given up.  Mr. Connor told Parliament he was
still after funny money from the Arabs, although the
Prime Minister told Parliament in May that the authorisation 
to Mr. Connor had been cancelled.

We have learned in the last few days that Mr. Connor 
wanted this fortune, more than three times as much as 
Australia's present total overseas debt, to build gas 
pipelines, uranium treatment plants, a factory to turn 
coal into petrol, and to electrify railways and deepen 
and construct harbours.

Who knew about all these schemes.  Mr. Connor never told
the Parliament and the people that this Wizard of Oz package 
was his goal in office.

He talked about Australian ownership, he talked about 
a deal with the Japanese to build a uranium enrichment 
plant.

He dazzled Parliament and the press each time he spoke 
with a rigmarole of statistics about gas reserves in the 
north west shelf or coal reserves in Queensland.

But, as with Dr. Cairns, Mr. Connor's dreams of a 
socialist Utopia were locked away, protected from public 
and Parliamentary discussion.

The people of Australia were never told that this was the 
way it was to happen, with Dr. Cairns and Mr. Connor sitting 
on top of the empire.

They were never invited to consider what would be gained 
for the nation, and whether sloganeering about multi- 
national corporations was being used as a smokescreen 
to conceal the old goal of socialism.

If they had, people might have asked themselves whether 
they preferred having the Americans owning a factory 
making breakfast food, or the Arabs holding a mortgage

                                                      3:
over the whole nation into the indefinite future, and 
whether they wanted the Australian debt to be increased 
by 1,000 dollars per family.

These schemes would have been disastrous for Australia.

They would have destroyed the faith of the Western world 
in the economic stability of the nation, and the 
soundness of its government.

They would have driven out of the country the exploration 
companies which in the last few years have made Australia 
self reliant for much of its oil needs.

They would have destroyed the present basis of Australia's 
credit rating in international loan markets.

They would have slashed at job opportunities and prospects 
for individual Australians, as the Government became the 
Nation's major employer.

I do not believe the Cairns-Connor socialist fantasies 
would have been acceptable to Australians.

This country cannot be prosperous without foreign capital. 
It is better that the British and the Americans own some 
factories than that the Arabs own the Government through 
a debt that might never be repaid.

I believe this is the explanation for the actions of the 
Whitlam Government in trying to raise money through half- 
baked money brokers instead of proper banks.

I believe this is the reason why the schemes were not even 
put to Cabinet and why the Queen's representative in 
Australia was told at the Executive Council Meeting in 
December that the loans were for temporary purposes, thus 
enabling a breach of the Constitution.

The Whitlam Government has produced a conspiracy of
deceit to conceal lunatic ambitions. In the process, 
their Government has been made a farce.


Economic Nationalism

All Australians want maximum Australian ownership of the 
Nation's industries and its resources.

However, we also acknowledge the difference between control, 
which must remain firmly Australian, and ownership.

Depending on the circumstances it may be necessary or 
desirable to permit partnership in ownership between 
Australian and overseas interests.

                                                     4:


There is also an obligation on Australians to recognise 
that our country is rich in resources, while others, rich 
only in the energies and talents of their populations, 
are dependent on countries such as Australia for the raw 
materials which they manufacture and sell.

Japan is notable among these nations. I doubt that
Mr. Connor's sloganeering has won much support from 
Australians but it appears to have had a disturbing 
and dangerous impact on relations with Japan, and their 
concepts of Australia as a reliable supplier.

In Government, we would pursue the goals of full Australian 
control and maximised Australian ownership, but in a 
rational manner that could be understood by our trading 
partners.

