<!--start metadata-->
Title: The senate elections
Description: radio talks
Date: 12/11/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               •c~a.st,..._' ~ i°'
                    ~.` • - ..~~ ` --~--








        MINISTER FOR THE ARMY



































NAREEN,              PARLIAMENT HOUSE
VICTORIA             CANBERRA, A.C.T.
TEL. TARRAVOUKYAN 44 TEL. 72867
                       72868

RADIO SPEECH                                  3HA - 12 November 1967

MALCOLM ERASER                                3YB - 16 November 1967






                    THE SENATE ELECTIONS




        On 25 November Australia will be voting for the Senate. At
nearly every election politicians have some reason for believing that the 
election is important and should attract the close attention of the
Australian people. It is often more difficult to impress this upon
electors inÿa Senate election than it is in an election for the House of 
Representatives. It is not quite so easy to make the sharp contrast between 
one party and another. This may be because people feel that the results of 
a Senate election will not necessarily alter the party in power in the House 
of Representatives and nor will it alter the policies under which the country 
is being governed.


        In the short term this is of course true, but it is equally true that 
a hostile Senate can frustrate the policies of the party in power. A hostile 
Senate can hold up legislation and undermine the authority of a Government, 
and can lead to a situation in which firm and resolute Government becomes 
very difficult indeed.


        To a certain extent this is what the Senate has tried to do over the 
last year. In the,, last elections for the House of Representatives we promised 
a change in (the policy under which grants would be made for the building of 
homes for old people. Up to that time, grants had been made on a basis of 
£2 for every £1 collected by an eligible organisation but fùnds made available 
by shire or municipal councils were not eligible for the grant. Our promise 
was to make such grants eligible.


        The' legislation to provide for this was passed in the House of 
Representatives on 13 April 1967 but was rejected by the Sen4ate on 3 May. It 
was rejected not because the Senate opposed what we were doing but because 
they wanted a still wider extension of the policy which would have involved 
additional funds. This is not something that any Government could allow. You 
work out your own budget and you divide it up as best you An in the interests 
of the whole country. Of course it is always very easy for an opposition to 
say "We want more of this and more of that - more funds for social services
and national( welfare, and more for national development." But it is quite   1
another thing to have the responsibility of providing funds'for all these
different purposes. Thus, if a Government says that it is tit policy to extend 
a benefit in a certain field, it would find its financial power completely 
distroyed if it were put in a position in which it had to accept Opposition

amendments that extended financial obligations even further We would

               2.


therefore not accept the Senate amendment and thus the legislation as we had 
proposed it was held up until this session, when it was again submitted to 
the Senate. This time they passed it without amendment.

   The same kind of frustration was felt over the postal charges. The
increases to these were unpopular, and of course we knew they would be.
Everyone wants better and improved postal and telegraph services but they
have to be paid for somehow. They must be paid for either by general revenues
collected through taxation or from the revenues that are collected from the
use of the services themselves. The only real argument in this matter has
been what proportion should be paid for by taxation and what proportion should
be paid for from general postal and telegraph revenue. Charges had been held
steady for some time and early this year the Government decided that if the
rate of development of postal and telegraph facilities was to continue as we
had planned and if the burden on the general taxpayer was not to be substantially
increased the Ièharges would have to be noticeably higher.

   The Opposition used its power in the Senate to reject these increased 
charges in a special meeting of the Senate held in the middle of the winter 
recess. One might well ask what was their purpose in calling the Senate 
togetherio block these increases when the same increases werè allowed to go 
through the Senate on 19 September without amendment. Was the first rejection 
a cynical use of power to embarrass the Government? Or was it a stand made on 
principle? If(it was the latter, how had the principle changed 13 weeks later?

   I instance those two things to show how policies can'bé upset by a 
hostile Senateland one of these policies was a direct resultcof an election 
promise which 4ras fully endorsed in the elections for the House of 
Representatives. Inleality, a Government cannot do what it has promised to do, 
it cannot carry out the mandate it has received from the people, unless it 
can control aomajority not only in the House of Representatives but also in 
the Senate.               q 1
   So thielection is important — not perhaps so vitallÿ'important 
because of policies that might involve domestic issues, but because of policies 
that concern foreign policy and defence. If a mistake is made within Australia 
on a purely dóaiestic issue there is a reasonable chance that tliat error can 
be made good. I do not say this to justify mistakes in domestic policies but 
to point out that if you make a mistake in foreign policy, if you alienate 
your friends, your allies and your neighbours, you may well find that it is 
beyond your power to make good the mistake. It is in this field, above all, 
that the policies of the Government and the Opposition are diametrically
opposed and with all the knowledge that I have been able to gLiin in three visits

               -3—


to Asia,in'meeting Asian diplomats in Australia and other visitors from 
Asia, I am still utterly convinced that the policies of the Government are 
essential for our own security and for the security of the whole area in which 
we live. Next week I will cbvelop this point of view further.

   If the Government-is to have a majority in the Senate after the next 
election we need to win five of the six states. With proportional representa- 
tion this is no easy task. Of the members who do not retire at this election 
we have 14, the Labor Party has 14 and there are two members of the A.C.P. Thus, 
we need to win 17 seats to give us a total of 31 votes in the Senate out of
60.

   If you believe that the policies we have followed:in Asia are right, 
if you believe they are important, I ask you to have this in mind when you 
cast your vote on the 25th.

