<!--start metadata-->
Title: Flowers for mother
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 15/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


      Sent to all newspapers, Freet1, White, Lehmann, & McKellar
                             D O/17.5.67

FOR PRESS                          No. 4864

                             ectorate of Public Relations, 
                            Army Headquarters, 
                            Russell Offices, 
                            CANBERRA, A.C.T.

                  FLOWERS FOR MOTHER

    Australian soldiers in Viet Nam spent 31,000 on flowers for Mothers' Day,
May 14.
    They ordered the white blossoms through the Australian Services Canteens 
Organisation's Viet Nam detachment, which provides a flower delivery service for the 
men.
    The orders have come from soldiers in all kinds of units. From the infantry- 
men of the 1st Australian Task Force at Nui Dat, the Logistic Support Group at Vung 
Tau, and Army Training Team advisers fighting beside Vietnamese and mountain tribes- 
people in isolated areas north of Saigon.
    The "flowers for home" scheme, however, is not a special service for Mothers' 
Day only, according to the officer commanding the Task Force Canteens Organisation, 
Lieutenant Bruce Anderson, of Horsham, Victoria.
    Lieutenant Anderson said today the soldiers could send flowers to anybody in 
Australia, at any time.
    He said the delivery service was just one facet of the Organisation's role in 
Viet Nam.
    Through its postal exchange stores at all major units, troops also buy a wide 
variety of goods at prices often 50 er cent less than they would pay at home.
    In the Task Force area's main store at Nui Dat, soldiers have made individual 
and bulk purchases amounting to 3314,000 dollars in the past six months.
    Soldiers have bought directly over the counter:
   .$20,500 worth of watches, radios, cameras and tape recorders,
   .329,000 worth of jewellery, household linen, clothing, ornaments, books and 
    magazines,
   .31,500 worth of flowers,
    These figures set at 3100 dollars the amount spent by each Digger in the Task 
Force during the six month trading period.
    In addition, most soldiers make many of their purchases at Rest and Recuperatio 
leave centres such as Hong Kong, Bangkok and Singapore. Individual purchases in these 
cities usually amounted to hundreds of dollars, Lieutenant Anderson said.
    He estimated that each soldier would take home about 3300 worth of "goodies" 
and gifts at the end of their tour of duty in Viet Nam.
    Soldiers of the Australian Services Canteens Organisation Detachment at the 
Task Force are: Lieutenant Druce Anderson, of Horsham, Victoria; Sergeants Michael 
UJilliams, of Grovelly, 'old., Des calker, of Radcliffe, .old., Kevin Eggins, of Singleton, 
NSW.; Corporals Ross Lane, of Adelaide, Dale Storey, of Murwillumbah, NSW., Peter
Stitz, of Melbourne; and Private Terry Wilson, of Sandringham, Victoria.

                          List: Commands only 
                          Further information:
                    CANBERRA: Major Allan S. Hinds
                           (65-4061) (49-6030)
15 May 1967       OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

