<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr Fraser's visit to the USA
Description: radio talk
Date: 9/10/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 RADIO SPEECH
 MALCOLM FRASER           9 October 1967




      In 1964 both Gough Whitlam and myself were asked to spend 
 about 2 months in the United States as guests of the US Government. The 
 purpose of the visit was to get some understanding of the United States and 
 to study any matters in which we had a particular interest. I might add 
 that the United States makes grants of this kind available to people in 
many different fields — in industry, journalism — but this was the first 
 time they had made such an offer to Australian politicians.

      I spent a good deal of the time while I was there in
Washington and New York because I wanted to get as good an understanding as 
possible of the United States attitude to many international and defence 
problems, especially those involving our own part of the world.

      At the time I never for a moment thought that the visit would, 
on my return to Australia, lead to quite unpleasant and unnecessary incidents 
with Gough Whitlam.

      It is well known that the Government and the Labor Party are 
strongly, and at times bitterly, divided on questions of foreign policy and 
defence. We do not see things the same way. But the Australian public has 
a right to expect that debates on these issues will be kept within realistic 
and, as far as possible, factual bounds.

      Over recent days you will have seen reports of statements made 
again by Mr. Whitlam about the Prime Minister. From the time of the Corio 
By—Election the Leader of the Opposition has been repeating the statement 
that a speech the Prime Minister made in Los Angeles had emgarrassed the 
United States Administration, implying that the bombing of North Vietnam 
had been continued virtually to save the face of the Australian Prime 
Minister and the King of Thailand. This charge was made on the basis of 
what some unnamed U.S. official is obliged to have said. The Prime Minister 
did make a speech in Los Angeles supporting the bombing as being a necessary 
part of the Vietnam war. This is a view which I have strongly supported on 
more than one occasion because I know the consequence and reality of increased 
casualties that would arise if the bombing were stopped without some reciprocal 
move on the part of the North. As a member of the Government with a 
particular administrative responsibility for our Army force in Vietnam I 
would hope the Australian people would demand that our forces should have 
all the support and all the strength that Australia can give them.

      Mr. Whitlam's claim that the Prime Minister had embarrassed 
the United States Administration is patently absurd. If it were true, it

                2.


would mean that the US was continuing a policy in which it did not believe 
merely to please Australia and Thailand. But the plain fact is that we 
know the views of the Administration. The Australian Government is in 
constant contact with the United States on many different aspects of this 
tragic war. Shortly after the Prime Minister's visit there was actually 
an intensification of the bombing and this again would hardly seem to support 
the view that it was being maintained merely because of what our Prime 
Minister had said.

      In other words, Mr. Whitlam has imputed views to members of 
the US Administration which it seems quite impossible that they could have 
expressed to him.

      Let me return to the point at which I began, which was the 
trip we both undertook at the same time to the United States in 1964. Of 
course, we spoke to a number of the same people but on different occasions. 
Shortly after I became Minister for the Army, Mr. Whitlam sought to embarrass 
me, and possibly the Government, by saying that officials of the US 
Administration were appalled at conversations I had had with them in which 
I had advocated the dropping of nuclear weapons on Hanoi and the breaking 
of the dikes on the Red River, which would destroy North Vietnam's food 
supply and drown possibly 2-3 million people in Vietnam. My reply to this 
in the Hansard report of 11 May 1966 reads in part as follows: "Not only 
is it a fabrication as to fact but also I am completely confident that 
officials in the State Department and the Pentagon with whom I spoke would 
not report to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition the substance of my 
conversations."

      It is therefore clear that I denied the allegation. It is also 
clear from the Hansard of the same date that Gough Whitlam, having made 
the charge, was determined to repeat it. It should be noted that despite 
my denial he continued to make the charge on the basis of what some unnamed 
U.S. official had supposedly said to him. I can well understand Mr. Whitlam's 
not wanting to retract what he had already said but I would have thought 
that as a result of my categorical denial his charges would not be repeated 
on later occasions. However, on two occasions recently he has repeated 
them, still using the alleged comments of an unnamed US official as evidence 
for this validity. On 17 August, in the International Affairs Debate, he 
raised the matter again and by interjection I denied it a second time. His 
reply to my denial (and I quote now from the Hansard report of 17 August 
1967) was: "If the Honourable gentleman had any reputation for truth I 
might ask for the withdrawal of that remark.

      I think it is interesting to note that this second accusation 
occurred after he had made a different but similarly based charge against

                3.


the Australian Prime Minister - that is to say, a charge again based on the 
alleged remarks of some unnamed official of the US Administration. As 
recently as 2 October at the Monash Universidy Teach-In on Vietnam he 
repeated this charge against tFe Prime Minister. At that time I pointed 
out the inaccuracy of his statement and this received some prominence in 
the Melbourne Suri.

      And now, in a Parliamentary debate on 5 October, he has once 
again come up with his earlier statement and my alleged advocating of the 
bombing of Hanoi and the breaking of the dikes. Since he was speaking in 
Parliament at a time when the proceedings were being broadcast I denied it 
again and reminded Mr. Whitlam that I had done so on the previous occasions 
when he had made the charge. Of course, he was still using the same 
evidence as before and making his charge on the basis of what some unnamed 
US official was alleged to have said to him.

      What sort of politics is this?

      The part that is difficult to understand is that the Leader of 
the Opposition should make this kind of charge, not having heard me advocate 
the matter because I never have, but on the basis of what some unnamed US 
official is alleged to have said.

