<!--start metadata-->
Title: Visit of the Queen Mother and Mr McMillan
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 2/03/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   MALC dú.M FRASL .., MEMBER FOR 11NNUU 
                            comments on
                 THE QUEEN Mt}TLU: +4 VISIT TO Cl`;MRRf3

        Last Wednesday was au historia occasion Lathe history 
of C    ra, our National Capital. The :queen Mother had arrived 
the      before from Sydney and everyone was eagerly awaiting the
opportunity to show the very real affection and loyalty which they
feel towards members of the Royal Family. Australians fool in this 
way not just because they are members of the Royal family but because 
of the devotion and dedication that each wad everyone of them show 
towards their own people of which we in Australia are a part.
         The wean Mother has charmed everyone with her graciousness 
 ince the first moment she arrived in this country.
         The first oermony which the %uoen loiter attended in
Ca bar was a military display at Duntroom. The outside of the 
parade ground was crowded with spectators quite early in the morning 
 and at about 10.00 a4. the Prime Minister, then the Governor-General
 and finally the queen Mother herself arrived. The omen Elizabeth 
 Banner was presented by the ',ueen Mother to the Commander of the
 Sovereign Company on behalf of the Aeon. The ceremony was most 
 impressive. The drummers from the military band piled the drums 
 in the centre of the parade ground, the Banner was draped over these 
 and then, with the cadets standing to attention n$h the eueen Mother 
 present on the ground, the Padres from the different denominations
 blessed and dedicated the Banner. The Standard Bearer then came 
 to receive the Banner from Ber i 1a jeety. The Commander promised that 
 they would remain the symbol of the loyalty end affection which they
 all held for the wueen.  Thereafter, the Company gave a display 
 of slow and quick marching which would be unequalled anywhere in the 
 world for precision and smartness. There were many who said that 
 it rivalled the trooping of the Colour in London.
         In the afternoon, the svueen Mother attended a Garden Party 
 at Government House and there all members of the Diplomatic Corps
 were presented to her.  3,000 or 4,000 people attended this Carden 
 Party in the grounds at Yarralnr 1 e.

        In the ev n ng, the highlight cc f ths queen's visit to 
Canberra began the State Hall xelú by t-hs Government with the
Primo Minister au host. It was indeed a gala occasion. Par]ieme. t 
House was gaily decorated for the occasion aad looked a sat nifioont
aigat,
        Short34- attar q p.m. the Governor enrol arr to
received the Roye1 salute and then the •tueen Mother herself amime up 
be steps into Kingt s Hell and everyone stood while the National 
Anthem was played. Shortly after she arrived, the ue Mother 
roc uived allartbers of the House of Representatives and all Senators 
who had not been presented to her on some previous occasion.
        There has been same criticism in the past how the ,ueen 
Mother has been almost compelled to stand and shake long lines of 
people by the hand, hut here, I agbery glad to say, that dOring the 
presentations, the ..,.ueen Mother rennin seated while Members and 
their wives bowed and csu,rttsied as they went last.
        After the presentations, the :.ueen Mother danced with 
Mx. Harold Holt, Minister foe Labour, and then the aoyal party
went to supper.
        The :;ueen's visit to Canberra is something which will 
live long in the memories of the people who saw it. It is certainly 
 something that I shall never forgot.
         Seeingthn 4ueen Motba r in this coy try s US
 forcibly that there are any things beyond more material ones
 matte life richer and happier. The .,ueon Mother, by her cren example
 of her devotion to her people and by her graciousness makes us realise
 this only too well,


 E8/2/19158.

