<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 2/09/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       -7311Z
PADI0 BaOAD JUSTSunday, 2nd September, ?H:=_ 
                Thursdey, 6th September, 3-Le
THE HON. NALCOLM FRAS:1:2, Ti.Pe





The Budget is seen as an instrument of social and political 
reform. This particular Budget effects a substantial 
transfer of payment from the productive sector of the 
Australian economy to welfare.

Many people will welcOme the efforts to relieve real
hardships. The extent of the Government's efforts in
this area can be measured b-- the fact that 51396 million.
of the $1938 million additional expenditure, or 72,
goes to the welfare area - social security and educational
expenditure. This is an enormous increase,. especially
when it comes on top of the heavy increases in recent
years. Up to 1965, total welfare totalled something
under $1200 million. By the last Budget of the Liberal-
Country Party coalition, total welfare had increased to
$2800 million or thereabouts, and this year, the total
expenditure is going to be about x'3400 million. This is
a very major area of Gwrernment expenditure and it has
been expanding rapidly in the last few years. This is
the most substantial positive feature of the present Budget.
It has been achieved at the expense of many other factors
and I intend to examine one of them in particular.

The Budget ignores inflation.

It is based on a $1938 million or 18.9% increase in 
Government expenditure. By subterfuge, the Government 
is dragging nearly $600 million from the private sector 
to the public sector. The overall deficit will be 
$687 million.

The Government has renounced Budget 7;olicy as a weapon 
against inflation, whereas the Budget ought to be the 
Government's principal weapon in fighting inflation. So 
far as fighting inflation is concerned, the Budget will 
do the reverse. It will add markedly to inflation.

Increased 'government revenue of $1600 million is going to 
be financed through inflationar:v increases in income, through 
wage increases putting people into higher tax brackets 
than they would otherwise have been in. For example, 
personal tax receipts will be increased by 27% or nearly 
$1100 million for this reason.

This shows in plain terms the Government's vested interest 
in continuing inflation. Australia is entering the era. 
oî South American economics. If anyone doubts this, look 
at the indicators.

                  2 -






   The volume of money increased by 54500 million last year, 
   by 26,;, while the volume of production increased by only 
   5%, and there can only be one result from interplay of 
   those two economic facts: a vast inflationary pressure.

   There are many social evils in inflation, but some people 
   are now speaking as though they don't exist. Some people 
   are suggesting that an 8%, 10%, or even 12% annual rate 
   of inflation is something we can live with, with impunity, 
   but it does carry through an arbitrary redistribution cf 
   wealth, and the people who suffer are generally the weakest.

   It spells death to many-exporters. It leads to inflation 
   psychology, people plan for it, and by planning for it, 
   they make it inevitable, and the Government is much to 
   blame for that. It becomes a disaster when people lose 
   confidence in money and refuse to hold it; it leads to 
   speculation in land and housing; to spending on goods 
   that would otherwise not occur. At a 20 % rate a year, 
   that inflation psychology has certainly arrived.

   Lest the Government blame it on its predecessor, it ought 
   to be noted that in the five years to 1969-70, the consumer 
   price index rose by 3.1%; in trle'three years to 1D72-73 
   by 5.9, but it was easing at the end of the last calendar 
   year, and when we look at this year - the year of tnis 
   Government - we find that in the March quarter, inflation 
   was 8.4%, the June quarter 13.2%, and in the last quarter 
   of the year, it will be 20%. That, admittedly, is my own 
   prediction, but I believe it will be correct.

   The Government says that prices are the cause cf inflation, 
   but in the December quarter of 1970 to the December quarter 
•  of 1972, adult male wages rose by over 21% and average weekly 
   earnings by over 22%; the consumer price index by under 12%; 
   and the operating profits of companies by a fraction over 
   125. So in these years at least, wages were putting much 
   greater pressure on the cost structure than prices or profits.

   Let's look at what the Government has done, has pretended to 
   do, tb control inflation - because its actions are basically 
   pretence, They are not prepared to tackle the real issues.

   Firstly, they have revalued the currency twice. They have 
   established a Prices Justification Tribunal. They have called 
   more funds to statutory reserve deposits. They have cut 
   tariffs. These cannot, and will not, be 'successful in 
   controlling inflation - in curbing it, while underlying 
   conditions for inflation remain. Except for the call to 
   reserves, they are aimed primarily at prices, and that is 
   sometimes the cause and sometimes the symptom- and - as I 
   have shown - not the main cause of the eurren+ inflation.


                            .../3

                                   - 3 -





         This Government will not act to relieve, pressure while 
         people accept inflation, while it is politically more 
         popular to ride with it than it is to defeat it, and I 
         wonder whether 2C, when that becomeo a plain and known 
         fact, will be sufficient to cause a national cry of anger 
         against the Government that is destroying the efforts of 
         people all round Australia,





•


















•

