<!--start metadata-->
Title: Estate duty, defence estimates - Canberra replacement, bomber
Description: press statement
Date: 27/10/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         PRESS STATEJENT:


         MALCOLM FRASER:




                                                              October 27th, 1963




                            Last week, the Parliament was very busy indeed. There 
         is still a lot of business on the Notice Paper, some of it important and 
         most of it relating to the Budget measures announced by the Treasurer some 
         time ago. It is not always realised that when you pass the Budget, this
         is not the end of the matter.  If increased pensions have been announced 
         or new concessions of one kind or another made,these nearly all involve an 
         individual Bill.


         ESTATE DUTY:


                           In this last week Bills have been announced to give 
         effect to the Government's decisions concerning the Superphosphate subsidy 
         and reduction in Estate Duty. I think the measure to give a reduction in 
         Estate Duty for the great majority of Estates is a very worthwhile one. 
         I think I pointed out earlier that the exemption limit has been raised 
         from £5,000 to £10,000 and that the exemption is going to be phased out
•        more gradually, This will mean, in effect, that an Estate of £20,000 
         will benefit from a 66% reduction in Commonwealth duty and one of about 
         £30,000 would uenefit by a 33% reduction Commonwealth duty. There are 
         many Estates that come within these categories, whether it be merely a 
         person's own home, a small business in a country town or a farm and all 
         such Estates will receive this benefit.


                           In addition to these Bills, the Parliament is still 
         discussing the Estimates in which the detailed expenses for the different 
         Departments are analysed by members who are particularly concerned with 
         the Department under debate.


         DEFENCE ESTIMATES - CANBERRA REPLACEmENT


                           last week, the Defence Estimates were debated and these 
         are of particular importance. It is not always realised that the Defence 
         Statement made by the Prime Minister last May is, on an average, raising 
         defence expenditure over the next five years by £41M, a year. This is a 
         pretty considerable increase and it is brought about by a small expansion
         in the personnel strength of the Air Force and of the Navy and a larger
411      increase in the personnel of the Army up to a total of 28,000 men.
         Of course, obtaining personnel is only one-half of the story. It is one 
         of the facts of life that Defence equipment has become much more complex 
         and much more expensive than it once used to be; it absorbs tremendous
         sums of money.   Some idea of the comparison can be given from the fact
         that a World War 2 Spitfire would cost about 12,000 and a Mirage Jet 
         Fighter with which the R.A.A.F. is now re-equipping itself will cost about-
         £1M. One Mirage would equal 100 Spitfires in cost.     Incidentally, 
         the Mirage Jet Fighter will be second to none in the world. A large 
         part of it will be made in Australia and only recently the Minister for 
         Air placed a firm order for an additional 40 Fighters, making a total of
         100.    Deliveries to the R.A.A.F. will be started next year.


                           The Air Force has also purchased a new Canadian
         Transport aircraft called a Caribou Mark I. The first of these new
         planes will be delivered in January or February of next year. This
         purchase was announced by the Prime Minister last Nay. Subsequent 
         deliveries will be made at the rate of 2 aircraft a month. The Caribou 
         is a twin-engine light tactical transport aircraft. It will be operated 
         by the R.A.A.F. mainly for Army co-operation work, including troop carrying. 
         The Caribou is quite remarkable for its ability to operate from sub-standard 
         airfields. It can take off and land in a very short distance.




                                                                           /2

                                             2

        BOMBER:

                         You will have seen that Mr. Townley, the Minister for 
        Defence, has been in Washington for the last few days concluding arrange- 
        ments for the purchase of a replacement for the Canberra. The Prime 
        Minister had announced the Government's intention in this matter last May 
        but it was by no means clear which 'plane would be best for Australian 
        conditions. In general terms Australia has two requirements that are not 
        common to many countries. Any plane we purchase needs to have a long 
        range and, secondly, it needs to be able to operate from relatively
        unsophisticated airstrips.    European requirements often do not have
        sufficient range and some other machines require a standard of airstrip 
        that is uncommon in South East Asia.

                         It would be quite unrealistic to order a plane to be 
        built precisely to our requirements because the relatively small number that 
        would be ordered would make the construction and development costs exorbitant. 
        In recent weeks there has been common newspaper talk about the American 
        Vigilante and Phantom. It has been suggested that these would be ideal
        for our conditions.    This however was not so, It was doubtful if either
        of these machines had the range necessary to our requirements.   Furthermore, 
        the Vigilante has been developed to operate off steel backed aircraft
•       carriers and therefore has many features that we would not require in addition 
        to needing a vdry heavy and sophisticated aitstrip.

                         It should be remembered that much of the information on 
        which the Government made its decision announced last week by the Prime 
        Minister is strictly classified and is not available to the general public. 
        However, I feel Australia should be well satisfied with the arrangement. 
        We are going to purchase two squadrons of 7FX's, delivery commencing in 
        1967, the same time as deliveries will be begun to United States Forces. 
        This machine will be the most up-to-date reconnaissance bomber in the world. 
        It is better than the United Kingdom T.S.R.2, which could be delivered about 
        the same time.

                         Meanwhile, the Canberra will continue in operation. It 
        should not be forgotten that the Canberra is still in operation in many of
        the air forces of the world, including Nato power's in Europe. It has a 
        useful life left. However, if the international situation should worsen, 
        that of course means South-East Asia, the United States has promised to 
        make available at almost no cost two squadrons of B-47Eis. These air- 
        craft are still in use in the United States and will be for some time. 
        If we decided we needed these interim machines we could get them as soon 
        as air crew and ground staff could be found for them. The E-47E carries 
        20,000 lbs. to the Canberra's 5,000, its range is four times as great; it 
        can operate higher in addition to have a good low levelAbility. Although 
        it is subsonic it is still considerably faster than the Canberra, The 
        performance of the TFX is apparently fantastic, but most of its details 
        are secret. It can, however, travel at 2? times the speed of sound.

                         These decisions eo2.-7 what has been a vexing problem
        for the Government and the Air Force, The Minister for Defence should 
        be congratulated on the success of his mission,




                                           O0O

