<!--start metadata-->
Title: Increased postal and telegraph rates
Description: radio talks
Date: 19/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•





     MINISTER FOR THE ARMY









     WX /le gm 4-ne?26





      Zn. ,A74;/on ~`2~cQe2, M.P.















NAREEN,       PARLIAMENT HOUSE
VICTORIA      CANBERRA, A.C.T.
TEL. NAREEN 4 TEL. 72867
               72868

                                ~-•~~ ~~ .X"---~`-'t ~V~-~C~ ~~ 6, ---‘1,r(4      ~

  PRESS STATEMENT                                     19 May 1967
  MALCOLM FRASER

                II1OREASED POSTAL AND TELEGRAPH RATES

          In the last few days there has been a good deal 
  of talk about the Government's-proposal to increase postal 
  and telegraph rates. The problem confronting the Post • 
  Office is the same as the one which confronts every 
  Government or organisation which must provide a service 
  for a growing and developing country. The strain on 
  resources comes because of a developing Australia, because 
  of an ever-increasing demand for additional facilities and 
  because people come to expect a higher and higher standard 
  of service. Basically, what the Government is attempting 
  to do is make some reasonable provision for the continuous 
  improvement of postal and telegraph services throughout 
  Australia.

          In part at least the•argument over this matter has- 
  been unrealistic because those who oppose the new increase 
  are not offering any alternative: if postal and telegraph 
  charges remain as they are now and if the Government's. objectives 
  for continuous expansion of the postal facilities are to be •
• achieved, then it is quite clear that the-additional funds
. will have to be found in an. ever-increasing volume from the
  tax, payer. The opponents of the Government's proposals forget
  to mention this. The Government believes that those who use
  the postal and telegraph facilities should, with sbne exceptions,
  pay the normal commercial cost of those services. In addition
  to this, the users of the services are also helping to cover
  the cost, of improving services for 'present users and for users
  of the post office facilities in future years. For my own
  part, I•cannot see any great strength in an argument that says
  that the tax payer should cover a larger percentage of this
  cost and the user, of the services should cover a smaller part
  of it. The composition of the groups of people who are tax
  payers and those who are users of the facilities of the Post'
  Office is largely the same and I think it is therefore slightly
  unrealistic to argue about which group the funds should come
  from.

          The important thing is that the Government should 
  provide the kind of service that Australians want.in the most 
  economical way possible and by and large, I think the Post 
  Office has done this. The rate of expansion of the Post Office 
  has been quite remarkable. Since 1960, money spent on capital 
  works has increased by 3123 million. Over the same period the

                                -  2 -

   number of articles handled by the Post Office has grown 
   by 604 million. Last year the demand for telecommunication 
   facilities increased by 16%. Since 1960, the number of 
   telephone services in operation has increased by 580,000. 
   In the last six years, for example, there has been a 31% 
   increase in the productivity of the Post Office, but only 
   a 10% rise in the number of people employed in postal 
   operations. There has not been an increase in.postal charges 
   since 1959, although general costs and wages, which effect 
   the Post Office 'just as much as they do the private citizen 
   or business, have increased by 22% in cost since 1959. There 
   has been a 40% increase in the wages of postmen and mail 
   sorters over that period. Postal clerks have received a 
   50% rise in wages, but there has not been a'general rise in 
   postal and telegraph rates since 1959.

              quite clearly, the Post Office cannot live with a 
   situation in which its costs are continually rising and its 
   revenue is remaining static unless it is to be subsidised 
   in ever-increasing proportions by the Commonwealth Treasury.

              Let us look at this from a different point of view. 
   In the last financial year the running cost of the Post 
   Office for telecommunications and postal services was
   slightly over 1;401 million. This included sums for deprecia- 
   tion and interest. Receipts over the same period were 
   slightly less than this. In addition to its running costs the 
   Post Office spent 3179 million.on capital works. This year
•  the figure will be increased to $1202 million. This is in 
   addition -to, and apart from, the general running costs of 
   the Post Office. The question which the Government has to 
   answer is -. how must capital works expenditure of the Post 
   Office be financed?. Who is to be burdened, not only with 
   the improvement of services that now exist but also with the 
   expansion of those services into new areas? The Government 
   believes-that the users of the services should pay some part 
   of these, but at the same time there will still be a signifi- 
   cant subvention from the Commonwealth Treasury.

              There has been a great deal of discussion over the 
   interest that is charged on moneys that are loaned by the 
   Treasury to the Post Office for capital works services. It 
   is said that interest should not be charged on these funds 
   and if it were not, the Post Office would, in fact, be making
   :1 Itt00 1rr?:..Ithy pvc,fi.L. F'roe    point of principlo I think it 
   is reasonable to charge interest on money that is loaned for

                                                                           .../3

  capital purposes. Unless you do this you will not know 
  if the Post Office is operating efficiently and you will 
  not know the size and extent of the Treasury's hidden 
  subsidies for postal and telecommunication services. It 
  is, in fact, a book entry which in cash terms does not mean 
  a great deal.
              Let me try andput this another way. In the last 
  financial year the total interest charged was about $60 
  million. I have said this was a book entry but it is one 
  that is covered by revenue receipts from the normal trading 
  operations of the Post Office. Interest is not paid on that 
  part of the Post Office's capital works programme which is 
  financed from its own depreciation provisions. It is 
  charged, however, on the new moneys provided by the 
  Commonwealth Treasury and thus, in these terms, the greater 
. the proportion of its own capital works programme that it
  has financed from its own resources and allowances for 
  depreciation, the smaller will be the interest charged to
  the Post Office,            But even so, this $60 million interest 
  does go back to the Post Office to cover part of its 
  capital works programme but it does only cover a part of 
  that programme which last year, as I have said, totalled
   179 million. If postal and telegraph charges were less 
  than they now are so that the Post Office did not pay any 
  interest, and if .its revenue were reduced by the i60 million
  interest charge, funds for capital works from the tax payer 
  would have to be increased by an equivalent amount. And 
  this then is really the choice - do you want to pay for the 
  expansion of the postal services by paying reasonable 
  charges for the use of those services or do you want tb 
  pa.y for the expansion of the Den.rtment's operations by 
  higher taxation? I have already said that I don't think 
  it is a very realistic argument when people condemn one 
  method of financing as opposed to the other and it is 
  entirely reasonable to take the view that the users of 
  the services should make a fair contribution to the 
 improvement and expansion of. Post Office facilities.

             There is one other point I would like to make - 
 the Government collects slightly over 94 million each 
 year in interests or dividends from several Government 
.instrumentalities. This includes the Australiaìn National
   i ri iit ., i_e-Al1 Il,t'1;]; isll, ('inLa ~i.ra Airwny,s, Australian 
 National Shipping Line, Snowy Mountains Authority and 
 other bodies, including •of course the Post. Office. If 
 the Commonwealth did not collect this $94 million from 
 the business-like operation of these authorities it would

 have to collect the money from other sources or reduce the 
 services it provides ir.one field - or another by an equivalent 
  .mount. >9L million .would represent a 5X% increase in income 
 tax on individuals or an'extra 5% in the dollar on company 
 tax, or a 25°ó rise:in sales tax. This again is just indicating 
 that if we want reasonable and improving services we have got 
 to: pay for them.

        'The 'debate' in Parliament would have. been to better 
 purpose •I'bélieve, if•it had concentrated on the questior. 
 "Is. 'the Post Office efficient?': rat::er•~ an.on the unrealistic 
 cuestion of• i.nterest -atee, ur. 'r.?y•••o, : vie,:' I think there are •
 quite 'good grounds •Îor a yint•t., the Post Gfiice is by .and:.
 large. efficient.'       a TGr1 1_,Jg  r.ariSat ion • and over. 
:the years 4t has demonstrated that •it has. .been able to carry 
 out ''.:ore ' a n-d more work ..With o.l;;! •modest. increases i n. tr_e : 
 nu:r:ber oÎ people e'7_ .i.oyeC..

