<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland - Heathmere new automatic exchanges
Description: press statement
Date: c1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS RELEASE.
        PORTLAND -- HEATHMERE NEW AUTOMATIC EXCHANGES

     Malcolm Fraser has announced that the new automatic
 telephone exchange at Portland will be brought into service at
 Portland at 9,00 a.m. on Sunday, the 28th November, 1965. The 
automatic equipment is accommodated in a new brick building located 
 in Tyers Streit, Portland. It is equipped for 2,000 lines and will 
have 1,340 subscribers connected initially.
     Simultaneously a new automatic exchange will be brought 
into operation at Heathmere replacing the existing Rural Automatic 
Ex(7'c.ange. Some Portland North subscribers will be transferred to 
the H3athmere automatic exchange and the balance will be transferred 
to the Portland automatic exchange.
     Additional telephone channels are being provided in the 
area and these will enable the maximum amount of local call traffic 
to be dialled by Portland, Heathmere and Cape Bridgewater subscribers, 
Full dialling instructions for these and other calls will be con- 
tained in a special brochure to be issued to all subscribers prior 
to the changeover.
    The equipment being introduced at Portland and Heathmere is 
of the modern crossbar type which has been adopted as the standard 
for installation at future automatic exchanges in Australia. It is 
designed to enable the telephone network to develop towards the
ultimate objective of nation-wide dialling for all subscribers.
    Some of the features of crossbar equipment are not readily 
apparent to subscribers and there are some new conditions in its 
operation on which it will be necessary for special advice to be given, 
7n particular, it is important that subscribers first listen for dial 
tongH, and then do not pause unnecessarily before, or during, dialling. 
There may be a pause of up to five seconds before the regular tone 
associated with the call is heard.
    Coincident with the changeover to automatic working, "pip 
tone" signals will be introduced to indicate the end of each three 
minutes charge period on trunk calls connected by the operator instead 
of the customary query of "Three (six, nine) minutes, are you extend- 
ing?" Calls requiring the assistance of an operator will be obtained 
by dialling 011,
    The Department is arranging a customer relations programme so 
that Portland and Heathmere subscribers may obtain the best results from 
their new automatic telephone services. This will include a telephone 
call to each subscriber prior to and after changeover to offer any 
necessary assistance or advice.

