<!--start metadata-->
Title: Outer space and disarmament
Description: press statement
Date: 30/09/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STAMEENT:

MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                     September 30th,1962


                       OUTER SPACE AND DISARMAMENT

             Before the present United Nations session which the Minister 
for External Affairs, Sir Garfield Barwick, has been attending, the great 
powers and other nations were meeting together at Geneva discussing
disarmament.   This is nothing new. Disarmament discussions have been 
going on for as long as most of us can remember and no success has been
achieved.   However, the great and pressing need for disarmament is no 
less urgent now than it was when the discussions first began many years ago. 
Indeed, I would say that the need for controlled disarmament is greater now
than it has ever been.   The reason for this is plain.  The two great 
powers in the world, the United States and Russia, are fast conquering
outer space.   Unless agreements are made to control arms on earth, I 
cannot see how the western world can prevent the Soviet from ultimately
using outer space for military purposes. At the present moment, I don't 
think any country has the techniques to do this, but at the current rate of 
space development in Russia and in the United States it will surely not be 
long before our knowledge of outer space and our ability to master the 
problems involved will make it possible for this new and alien sphere to be
used in a military fashion.  For this reason the failure of the last 
Disarmament Conference is all the more depressing.

             From time to time the Russians have come forward with vast 
and bold propaganda proposals for complete disarmament over a period of,
say 4 years.   The West has never been able to accept the Russian 
proposals as they stood for the simple reason that there has never been 
any element of inspection or control in the Russian proposals. How can 
we know that they are going to disarm unless there is some impartial 
observer who can check all parties to see that disarmament is in fact
taking place?   The Russians have looked upon any form of inspection as 
an excuse to spy in Russian territory. Therefore the Russians have never
accepted inspection or control. Because of this, disarmament proposals have
so far failed.   However, the West has been particularly keen to break down 
this Russian resistance to the vital elements of inspection and control, 
and has therefore constantly put forward counter proposals and taken 
initiatives of its own to try and meet Russian objections without violating
Western security.   So far, the United States and the United Kingdom have 
had no success.

             Disarmament discussions have centred very largely over the 
questions of nuclear and atomic weapons because it is recognised by all 
the great powers that the use of these weapons present the world with an
increasing and continuous danger of annihilation.  However, the Russians 
have maintained their objections in this field as they have in the general 
field. They will have no inspection and no control.

             The Western world has devoted its scientific resources towards
trying to overcome this.   In recent years, the West has developed 
instruments of such great sensitivity that they would be able to detect 
any surface or above the ground atomic or nuclear explosion in Russia with- 
out having inspection posts on Russian or Communist soil. This advance 
in the scientific field made it possible for the West to offer to sign a 
Test Ban Treaty with the Russians without oh site inspections. However, 
the West has not yet got instruments sensitive enough to distinguish under- 
ground atomic tests and nuclear tests from earthquakes and some inspection 
would have been necessary to detect Russian underground tests or to see 
that they were not conducting tests underground.


                                                                /2.

                              -  2 -


           At the recent discussions the United. Kingdom and the United 
States therefore put forward two proposals - the first was that there 
should be a complete ban on all atmospheric and outer space tests of
nuclear weapons without any inspection. The other proposal that the 
West put forward involved underground tests, and this did provide for 
on site inspections which would be necessary to make sure that any
agreement of this kind was being kept.  Without any discussion, 
without apparent thought, within minutes of the proposals being tabled, 
the Russian representative rejected both proposals out of hand. This
was a depressing exhibition.  Increased scientific and technical know- 
ledge had made it possible for the United Kingdom and the United States 
to-make significant concessions to the Russians in the field of inspection. 
Inspection was no longer necessary for above ground tests. At the very 
least, one would have thought that the Russians would say they would 
consider these proposals and examine them and perhaps suggest amendments. 
They would have done this if they had any genuine desire for disarmament 
in any field.• Thy did not do this. They rejected both proposals out 
of hand, even though one of the proposals answered all the previous 
objections which they had had in relation to a nuclear test ban for which 
the United States and the United Kingdom have been working for many years.

          We can be certain that the United States and the United Kingdom 
will continue to work for disarmament and will continue to work for a 
sensible and workable Test Ban Treaty so far as nuclear weapons are con- 
cerned. However, there can be little hope with the current stage of 
Communist thinking that the Western negotiators will have any success.

          The Russian action will, I believe, have significant effect on 
the views of neutral nations, or nations that have had a significantly 
independent attitude in relation to the East-West struggle, such as India. 
There are now neutral nations who meet with the great powers to discuss 
these disarmament problems on a Committee of the United Nations. The 
draft proposals that were put forward by the United States and the United 
Kingdom met United Nations specifications and they must have impressed the 
neutral countries by their sincerity and by the way in which they had 
done so much to meet previous Russian objections. The off-hand Russian 
rejection of these proposals must surely have done something to damage 
Russian prestige with these countries.

