<!--start metadata-->
Title: The infirm, the sick, the needy, health
Description: Press release
Date: c1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS RELEASE

(THE INFIRM, THE SICK, THE NEEDY)

By the Member for Wannon, Mr Malcolm Fraser, Federal Minister 
for Education and Science.

    Fear of the financial consequences of long-term and 
chronic illness is considerably reduced for those patients who 
insure adequately with a hospital fund.
    This results from improvements introduced in the recent 
Budget in those areas indicated by a Government examination to be 
most in need of attention.
    These advances in the health scheme were directed to 
aiding the chronically ill, the aged infirm and the handicapped 
young.
    From January 1 next year, aTatient suffering from a 
chronic or long-term illness will be eligible for full hospital 
insurance benefits regardless of his length of stay in hospital.
    Formerly those suffering a pre-existing or chronic 
ailment who remained in hospital longer than for a period of 
about three months did not receive full benefits.
    They received a total benefit of $5 a day after the 
three months' ended.
    But under the improved scheme, the patient continues to 
receive benefits covering the normal cost of the type of bed for 
which he is insured - whether it is public, intermediate or private.
    Take a patient in a Victorian intermediate ward. He'is 
in a fund and paying the family rate of $1.20 a week. His combined 
normal benefit is $14 a day. If he has to stay longer than three 
months, his benefits fall to $5 a day.
    But under the new scheme, his benefit rises up to
$13.50 a day -'fully covering the daily hospital fee.
    The Minister for Health announced that new health measures 
were the first results of studies by the Government in the social 
welfare field.
    The Commonwealth will also offer the states funds to 
promote the development of strong, co-ordinated home-care programs.
    Under the supplementary nursing-home benefit announced in 
the Budget, patients in nursing homes needing more intensive care

•  •

                , 




                    —2—


         will receive an additional $3 a day on top of the $2 a day
         ordinary benefit.
             They do not have to insure with funds to qualify for
         this.
             This new step is expected to lead to a further increase
         in both the capacities and standards of nursing homes in Australia.
             The Commonwealth has entered an entirely new field with
         its Budget decision to pay benefits for physically and mentally
         handicapped children.
             The benefit of $1.50 a day is to be paid for children
         up to the age of sixteen in a home conducted by a religious or
         charitable organisation which employs special nursing staff.
             The new health measures announced in the Budget will
         cost an extra $28 million in a full financial year.
             It is estimated this financial year that all health
         benefits will cost the Commonwealth more than $290 million —
         compared with about $178 million in 1962/63.
             Cost to the Commonwealth for drugs supplied under the
         pharmaceutical benefits scheme is expected to rise to more than
         $76 million.
             Medical benefits will cost more than $48 million,
         and hospital benefits as well as payments to public hospitals
         for pensioners nearly $60 million.
             One of the measures of an enlightened modern society is the
         manner in which it cares for its aged and its ill. It is money
         well spent.

