<!--start metadata-->
Title: Immigration, unemployment, budget
Description: electoral talk
Date: 17/08/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Leader of the 'Opposition


    HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER                          f



    ELECTORAL TALK                       Sunday 17th August, 1975      3HA
                                         Thursday, 21st August, 1975   3YB




    The Budget which the Labor Government is to bring down this week
    is a critical one for Australia.  As a result of the policies which 
    have been pursued by the Labor Government over the past three years, 
    Australia is now in one of the most serious economic crises in its 
    history.

    Unemployment is at its worst level since the Great Depression.
    Inflation is a record, so is industrial unrest while interest rates
    are also higher than they have ever been in Australia's history.  The 
    prospect of owning a home has slipped away for young couples, under the
    impact of record rises in building costs and record interest rates.

    Average farm incomes have been halved, while for some sections of 
    rural industry such as cattle growers, the only immediate prospect is
    bankruptcy.   The building, textile and clothing industries have
    been devastated.   No section of manufacturing industry is unaffected.

    Over a year, the value of the dollar has deteriorated so that in the
    supermarket it is now worth 85 cents.  The collapse of the real estate 
    market has eliminated the last of the traditional hedges against 
    inflation, and it is now impossible to save or invest in a way which
    stops savings being eaten away by inflation.  The average taxpayer 
    works 3 months of the year for the Government, and pays to the Labor 
    Government almost half of every extra dollar that he earns through 
    overtime or extra work.

    The Government no longer pretends, as it once did, that inflation
    was imported into this country.   It no longer attempts to deny that 
    the economic dislocation and suffering which have been afflicted on 
    the Australian people is home-made in Australia, by the most
    incompetent Government the nation has had since Federation.

    The Party which in 1972 promised the electorate a growth rate of
    6% or 7% in each of the past three years, produced an economy which
    actually declined last year by 3%.  Among the major industrial 
    countries, only Britain and Italy are suffering the same prolonged
    inflation as Australia.   None of this would have happened under a 
    Government which understood the working of the free enterprise
    system.   It would not have happened if the Government had sought to 
    manage the economy instead of waging an artificial war against the 
    State and Local Government structure with the aim of centralising 
    power in the Canberra bureaucracy.


Commonwealth Offices, 4 Treasury Place, Melbourne, Victoria 3002

ELECTORAL TALK                                        17/8/75 & 21/8/752:


We have, under this Government, seen two budgets brought down
dedicated to this purpose.                                               •

The budgets of 1973 and 1974 did not even attempt to be weapons 
against inflation or to be part of any overall plan of economic management. 
The budget which the third Labor Treasurer, Mr. Hayden, is about to 
announce is, according to Press reports, unique for this Government. 
If these reports are accurate, the Labor Government is attempting for 
the first time to come to grips with the economic problems which
through its own policies it has inflicted on this nation.        The test 
of this budget is whether in fact press reports are correct and the 
budget does have an economic purpose and further whether the budget 
provisions are the responsible appropriate measures required by the 
nation to deal with the economic crisis.



IMMIGRATION:

The Opposition policy on immigration and ethnic affairs was announced
during the past week by the Spokesman, Mike McKellar.        It sets out 
a programme for the active encouragement of immigration at a level
which best suits Australia's national interests.        Under the joint 
Opposition policy, immigration is part of a broad national strategy 
guided by principles of humanity, equity and compassion.

The Liberal and National Country Parties recognise the special needs 
of migrant peoples.

We also offer the maximum opportunity for ethnic groups to contribute 
to Australian society.

We will establish a separate Department of Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs.     Immigration policies will be constantly re-appraised to 
ensure that they contribute to a steady improvement in living standards
for all Australians.     There will be full and continuing consultation 
with ethnic groups and research into migrant needs and problems. 
The Liberal and National Country Parties believe that immigration is 
vital to the growth of Australia and for the enhancement of its 
living standards.

Entry into Australia should be selective but not discriminatory, and 
the welfare and settlement prospects of the individual migrant will 
take priority over the immediate needs of the employment market.

The assisted passage scheme will be continued and improved, and the 
presence of close family relationships in Australia will be an 
important consideration in approving migrant entry cases.

The endorsement of Misha Lajovic as a Liberal Candidate to the Senate 
at the next elections will provide a special voice in the Parliament
for the migrant community.      Misha Lajovic has been selected by the 
New South Wales Liberal Party in third position on the Liberal Senate 
ticket which means he can expect to become a member of the Parliament 
at the next election.
                                                                        ../

•



         ELECTORAL TALK                                     17/8/75 & 21/8/753:


         This selection is most welcome to the Parliamentary Liberal Party     •
         and to the Opposition.

         I am confident Misha Lajovic will be a worthy and distinguished
         Senator.   I believe he will be the first of the great wave of post
         war migrants from continental Europe under the Calwell    immigration
         programme to enter the Parliament.

         Misha Lajovic was born in Slovenia and was a member of the Royalist 
         Underground in Yugoslavia from 1941-1945.

         He served with the British Occupation forces in Italy from 1945 to
         1948 and migrated to Australia in 1951.    He has been a member of the
         Liberal Party since 1959.   He has been active both in migrant affairs 
         and in the Liberal Party and is currently President of the Liberal 
         Party's western metropolitan region and Chairman of its Executive 
         on Migration Affairs.

         With the election of Misha Lajovic the Liberal Party in the Senate
         will number representatives of both the oldest and the newest 
         Australians.

         I do not suggest for a moment that Mr. Lajovic is going to Canberra 
         to represent only migrants any more than I would say this of Senator 
         Neville Bonner, the first aboriginal to sit in the Federal Parliament. 
         Mr. Lajovic has been endorsed by the Liberal Party to represent New 
         South Wales, just as Senator Bonner represents Queensland.
































         Malcolm Fraser, M.P.

