<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Description: press statement
Date: 10/07/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   (-7T.it 'iL1241.•

                          lOth,1960


              CipSOIOROOO

      A few days ago I went to Adelaide to visit the Divisions

of 3oils of C.6.I.L.u. I wanted to see what this Division was doing 
          on
because l believe thatja long term basis the results of its researches

ay do much to lower farmers costs. The problems I wanted to examine 

in particular concerned the question of soil aoalysis and the use of 

artificial fertilisers.

       C.S.I.R.Q. has already done some work on soil analysis 

in certain parts of Australia. They have shown quite clearly in some 

areas, after conside.able quantities of super have been put on soil, 

that the quantity and quality of drops taken off that soil, for a 

period of up to five years, will not diminish if no further super is 

used. This does not apply to every area, but quite clearly, for those 

areas in which it does apply, a very considerable saving in cost is 

indicated.

       In addition, experiments have also been done to show 

that in areas that have had a ton or more of super it is sometimes 

found that there is sufficient super or sufficient phosphate in the 

soil, and applications of further superphosphate is wasted. However, 

in these cases, it has been found that what the soil in this stage is 

short of is not super but sulphur, and the small amount of sulphur in 

the superphosphate was being beneficial. ,uite clearly, applying 

sulphur through superphosphate is a wasteful and an expensive process. 

An economic way of applying sulphur is through gypsum.

        C.S.I.R.O. has only done a small amount of work in 

this field, but it has done enough work to indicate that the 

possibilities for the future are very great indeed .

        In regard to other matters there is a certain 

amount, of course, that farmers can do for themselves. There is 

nothing to stop a farmer jugaling his super quantities to a certain 

extent, or to leaving super off a strip for two or three years to 

see if the quantity and the quality of the grass deteriorates in any 

way. I have no doubt that many farmers do this, but the point here 

is not just one of straight out superphosphate. Most Australian

                  2
soils, in their initial stages, are short of superphosphates and, 
therefore, Australian farmers apply super at the rate of a bag or 
half a bag to the acre, and that's 411 they do about it, and that's 
all that we have the knowledge to do at the present time; but there 
comes a 'stage where some soils are no longer short of phosphates, and 
where applications df further phosphates will not increase productivity. 
At this stage our present knowledge doesn't make it possible for us 
to determine easily whether or not other things are in short supply 
in the soil, When we have enough superphosphate in the soil, the 
limiting factor may be sulphur, or potassium, or something else, 
and experimentation is needed to discover what it is.
       As more and more areas will soon be added to that part 
of Australia which has had a ton or thirty hundredweight of super to 
the acre, so will more and more areas be getting to the stage where 
there may be enough super, or enough phosphate available in the soil, 
and where the soil may be running into deficiencies in other fields. 
That is why research in this section of the Division of Soils is most 
important because Australia's superphosphate bill is a fantastically 
large one; anything that can be done to reduce a farmer's super bill — 
to give him better value for the money he spends on artificial 
fertilisers — will be a very marked benefit in reducing that farmer's 
costs, and who knows but when our soils have been improved for a 
considerable time with superphosphate, then with the application of 
other things we may be able to lift our productive capacity as much 
again as we have already done by application of super.
       C.S.I.R.O. is trying to work out techniques so that at 
some stage in the future, and I want to emphasise that this is a very 
long while off, if people can send samples_ of their soil to Research 
or Diagnostic Centres, and send with those samples a history of the 
paddock, then technicians would be able to estimate what phosphates 
or what fertilisers are needed for the growing of certain crops. 
This can't, apparently, be done by a straight out chemical analysis; 
a chemical analysis can get so far but it cannot say definitely and 
accurately what is needed.

               3 SID
     Therefore, to try and overcome this, C.S.I.R.O. as a 
trial experiment have taken snaU pots of soil from areas and 
have conducted experiments with it. They put on differing 
fertilisers in these small pots, measuring the quantities moat 
aceurately, and they watch how the plants grow as a result of 
different fertiliser applications.
     At the same time, they make continuel chemical analyses 
of the soil and, therefore, they Will be able to get a correlation 
between the chemical analyses in the soil and the way the plants 
actually grow. When this happens, or when they can get set 
techniques and set results put down, it may go a long way towards 
giving an extension service to farmers that will be of untold 
benefit to them.
     No doubt before all the improved areas in Australia 
can be covered, C.6.I.R.O. would have to do these pot experiments 
with samples from all the different soil types throughout Australia. 
This would be a memoth task, but it is a task that can be done 
and it is a task that would, I believe, pay tremendous dividends 
for the farming community of Australia; it would have a direct 
result in lowering costs by making it possible for us to get much 
more efficient use of the fertilisers which, under present 
circumstances, are so very expensive.
     There was another section of research which was done 
by the Division of Soils and which has now largely been completed. 
It may not be of very great significance, except in certain 
instances, but it was interesting. We have probably all had 
experience with dams that don't hold water and, in certain areas, 
it was impossible to find soil that would hold water and 
therefore earth dams could not be built.
      C.S.I.R.O. set a research scientist into doing some 
work in this field, and they have now discovered how to make earth 
dams hold water at a reasonable cost for almost every type of 
soil throughout Australia. There are two soil types which I 
think have still defied the efforts of research officers, but

             4

they are working on these. To make a _dam hold water, what you 
have to do is to have your soil type analysed and then, depending
on the result, there ïe a certain chemical that in sicll. 
quantities is harrowed in over the whole surface of the d€ .G 
When this is done it is then consolidated by rtlnning a tractor
over it or a. roller of some kind, and that is all there is
involved to it.
      if there is anyone who has a dam that doesn't bold
water and they want to make it bold water, the best thing to do 
would be to ;et on to the local Department of agriculture people
who should have detailed information on this matter.
      The salvation of Primary producerk, in this day
and age of rising costs may well lie on more efficient research 
and extension and on speedy and ready application of the results
of research. T am confident that in the years to come the 
Division of Soils of C.â.I.R.O. will be making a marked 
contribution to the reduction of costs of primary producers.

