<!--start metadata-->
Title: Kimberley development
Description: press statement
Date: 7/10/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT:

 MALCOLM FRASER:

                           October 7th,1962


             KIMBERLEY DEVELOPMENT

      Some good news was released in Perth recently. For a long time 
it has been known that the Commonwealth Government is working in conjunction 
with the West Australian Government to develop the Kimberley region. The 
Commonwealth has provided the money to build a small dam at Bandicoot Bar on 
the Ord River which will enable pilot farms to be established so that the 
.economic prospects for farming in the Kimberley region can be properly assessed. 
If the initial pilot farms are successful, a further dam will be built on the 
Ord which will make it possible to irrigate up to a quarter of a million acres. 
I am sure the money will be immediately forthcoming once it is seen that 
agriculture has a real prospect in this area.

      The news that came from the West a few weeks ago was that the 
first five pilot farms on the Ord River irrigation project had been allocated 
by the West Australian Land Board. I understand the farmers will be taking 
up their blocks very shortly. A further seven farms will be allocated next 
year. Up to about 300 farms can ultimately be allocated as a result of the 
building of the small dam at Bandicoot Bar.

      The West Australian Land Board received more than 500 enquiries 
for these farms and some came from all the mainland States in Australia so 
there has been an Australia-wide interest in what is happening in the
Kimberley region. A Victorian and a Queenslander were among the first five 
successful applicants.

      This is another milestone in the steady and sensible development 
of the northern region. It would have been possible five years ago for a 
Government to say: "We are going to have irrigation farms all along the Ord. 
We will irrigate a quarter of a million acres. We will build the dams that 
are necessary." The farms could have been allocated but the economic
prospects for the settlement would not have been known. This can only be 
discovered after pilot farms have been established for a year or two and 
after it is seen how things work out. This is because the economics of 
test plots and of farms sometimes works out quite differently. Cotton will 
be one of the main crops and this could be a very valuable crop for Australia 
because now our cotton requirements are imported. However, cotton crops in 
the Kimberley region require a heavy expenditure on insecticides and this 
casts some doubt on the economics of growing cotton.

      Safflower will almost certainly be a highly profitable crop. 
This is an oil seed which has various purposes.

      If the farming venture can be mare a success, as ultimately it 
must be, the cattle industry in the Kimberleys will be greatly improved. 
Almost certainly the farms will develop good pastures to fatten cattle and 
cattle feed will be grown as a specific crop. This will make it possible 
for the breeding areas of the Kimberleys that cannot be farmed to turn off 
their cattle quicker. It will give a higher return and thus give the 
station owners the opportunity and the incentive to im rove their herds.

      The northern part of Australia and, in this instance, the
Kimberleys, is slowly but surely starting to move forward. This is the 
result of patient effort by all research organizations, by Governments, both 
State and Federal, and-by many individuals who are dedicated to the settle- 
ment and opening of Australia's empty north.

                                 2



                         SENATOR AYLETT


               In the last two or three weeks, Tasmania's controversial 
Labour Senator, Senator Aylett, has again hit the news. Senator Aylett 
last stood for the Labour Party at the Senate elections four years ago. 
He has two years of his current six--year term left. He is clearly not 
going to get the Labour Party endorsement again.


               The position arose in this way. After the last Senate 
election, in which Senator Aylett was a candidate, Senator Aylett decided, 
for some reason or another, that this would be his la t term in Parliament. 
He may have had a row with the local Labour Party in Tasmania and so won 
their disapproval, or he may have just decided another six years as a 
Senator would be enough. However, whatever the reason, he came to the 
view that he should live on the Gold Coast of Queensland rather than live 
in Tasmania where he could represent his electorate.

               Senator Aylett lives on the Gold Coast, not only during 
the Parliamentary recesses, but also when the Senate is sitting. He has, 
in fact, made it almost inevitable that the Government won't be defeated 
in the Senate because he is hardly ever there to vote.

               You might wonder why or how a Senator can remain a member 
under such circumstances. A member can be absent from the Senate for, 
I think, six weeks without leave of absence which would be granted on the 
motion of his Party Leader in the Senate.

               There is another way of avoiding this necessity, that is,
by clocking in once every six weeks. If a person does this and appears 
for just one day in six weeks or whatever the precise time is that makes 
it possible for him to be away for another six weeks before he has to 
clock in. This, broadly, is how Senator Aylett has attended to his 
Senatorial duties.

               The Labour Party is clearly in some dilemma about Senator 
Aylett. They know if they keep all their members present in the Senate 
there is a possibility of defeating the Government in the Senate in the 
course of the next two years. This would depend, of course, in part, upon 
how the Independent Senator Turnbull - also from Tasmania - or Senator
Cole, D.L.P. cast their votes. If they both vote against the Government 
and if Senator Aylett is present the numbers in the Senate are 30 all, but 
if Senator Aylett is almost permanently away, the Government has a majority 
without the Independents.

               The Labour Party was probably hoping for some time that 
Senator Aylett would have a fit of conscience and attend to his duties in 
Canberra and hoping that it would not have to take severe disciplinary 
action against him, because once it did that, the Senator's displeasure 
with his own Party would be increased and he would be much less likely to 
come to Canberra to vote for it during a crucial division.

               However, from the news in the last week or two, it appears 
that the Labour Party in Tasmania is now starting to run out of patience 
with Senator Aylett. They have asked him to show cause why he should not 
be expelled from the Party. Then there was a report that the Deputy Leader 
of the Opposition, Gough Whitlam, was going to Tasmania to discuss the 
matter with them.

               Some people may see humour in this sort of thing; others 
may say it is just what you would expect from a politician and this is the


                                                                   /2 .

grave and serious damage that behaviour such as Senator Aylettts does. 
If everyone behaved in this fashion Parliament and democracy would not
work. The great majority of members take their duties seriously, 
not only in Canberra but also in their electorates, and no matter to 
what Party they belong, they act in accordance with their beliefs and 
to the best of their ability. I doubt if anyone can say Senator Aylett 
has done this. Behaviour of this kind on the part of one member can do 
so much to bring the whole institution of Parliament and democracy into 
disrepute.

         It is for this reason that I regret that the Labour Party 
did not initiate disciplinary steps a great deal earlier. While it is 
true that they cannot get a Senator out of the Senate once he has been 
elected they could, at least, purge any person who ignores his parliamentary 
duties from the ranks of their own Party and make such a person the outcast 
that he should be amongst politicians. If the present moves in Tasmania 
are carried through successfully this may be what will happen.

         However, there is one thing of which we can be sure - 
Senator Aylettts membership of the Senate coupled with his absence from 
the sittings of the Senate will make it very difficult, if not impossible, 
for the Government to be defeated in that Chamber by the Opposition.

         Senator Aylett is not the only Labour Party Senator who 
has been absent from a great number of divisions in the Senate, and this, 
led to an argument in the Labour Party Caucus which resulted in a motion being 
passed on the initiative of Mr. Webb, Labour Party Member for the Stirling 
seat in West Australia. The motion was to the effect that, during the 
sittings of Parliament, all. Labour Party members must attend, and they have 
to clock in and clock out when they arrive and when they leave Canberra. 
It seems a strange resolution for any Party to have to pass,

