<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: electoral talk
Date: 23/08/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                             PRIME MINISTER


  FOR MEDIA                                                     SUNDAY AUGUST 23 1981



                                         ELECTORATE TALK

  The budget introduced into Parliament last week by the 
  Treasurer, John Howard, represents the clearest possible 
  statement of the Government's intention to maintain the 
  priority we have always placed on providing a better life 
  for individual Australians and their families. For the budget 
  will strengthen prosperity, maintain confidence and provide 
  the creation of yet more new jobs in the private sector by 
  further restraining Government spending and continuing the 
  thrust towards smaller government, and by bearing down on 
  interest rates and inflationary pressures.

  At the same time, it is a budget which increases assistance 
  to a large number of people in the community who are in particular 
  need, which strengthens our national security and which lays a 
  basis for sustainable reductions in the tax burden on individuals 
  and families. It is a budget which will strengthen the revival 
  of Australia's economy that has come about as a result of the 
  policies consistently pursued by the Government since 1975. 
  These policies have led to higher employment, better wages and 
  living standards and lower inflation.

  In considering a budget, we need to realise that the most 
  fundamental requirement iA'•to achieve overall economic stability, 
  for only in this way can we secure the opportunties and improve 
  standards of living which everyone wants. Tf the basic policy 
  approach established in the budget is not right, no other policies 
  can be effectively implemented.

  It was this important fact that the Labor Government ignored 
  between 1972 and 1975, to the lasting cost of all Australians, 
  and theircurrent policies and attitudes.make clear they have 
  still not learned this lesson.

  There has been much comment on the decisions we have made on 
  sales taxes. But let me put these decisions into perspective. 
  During the last year, there has been a real increase in wages
• of some 4%. This means that up to $3,000 million has been added 
  to real living standards. By comparison, the sales tax decisions 
  will raise a total of about._$550 million this year, and by enabling 
  us to bring the budget almost.into balance, that extra revenue 
  will enable Australian. families to enjoy-continued increases in 
  prosperity.

  The most basic objective of all our policies has been, and remains, 
  to reduce the overall burden of taxation on families. The budget 
  has made a valuable step towards shifting the balance of taxes 
  away from direct on to indirect taxes. As the Treasurer has pointed
                                                                                                      .../2

                         - 2 -




 out, one of the consequences of this is that it increases 
 the potential for desirable reductions in direct taxes and 
 particulary personal income tax as economic and budgetary 
 conditions permit.

 I might also remind you that earlier this year in July, 
 we introduced income tax cuts that will leave some $500 million 
 more in tax payers' pockets, and they have started to do so 
 already. The new tax rebate of 32 cents in the dollar for 
 basic health insurance will return a further $600 million 
 to individual income tax payers. That just shows we are 
 concerned very much about reducing the tax burden.

 Since we first took office nearly 6 years ago, the
 Government has stressed that there is only one way to lower 
 the tax burden in a real and sustainable way, and that is by 
 holding down government spending. In this year's budget, 
 after allowing for meeting the extra expense of an extra 
 pay period for pension, benefit and salary payments, a 
 phenomenon which occurs only once in every 12 years or so, 
 budget outlays increased by less than 1% in real terms.

We have now cut back government spending to only about 
 271 cents in every dollar produced in Australia, compared 
 with over 30 cents in every dollar taken by government in 
 1975/76, and under Labor, the proportion was rising rapidly. 
 Our objective remains to cut it back still further.

 We have also in this budget virtually eliminated the huge 
 budget deficit inherited from the disastrous Labor years, 
 and by doing so we have not only laid the foundations for 
 reducing the tax burden,'but we have also reduced claims for 
 capital funds to ease pressure on interest rates.

 In all these ways, our concern for Australians and their
 well-being is clearly expressed. Moreover, in our expenditure 
 decisions we have given further emphasis to the needs of groups 
 which include those most in need in the community.

 Spending on social welfare and security will rise significantly
 in real terms because of continued automatic indexation of pensions
 and benefits, because of increased family allowances for larger
 families, a group which includes many of the poorest,
 because we have begun a programme of crisis accommodation
 with special emphasis on families in distress, and because we
 have redirected and increased the programme of rental assistance
 to pensioners and long term sickness beneficiaries.

 The 1981/82 budget is one that looks to the immediate problems 
 of needy, groups, but also to the long term interests of all 
 Australians and their families.




                         ---000---

