<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry
Description: Radio talk
Date: 8/03/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO SPEECH.

       BY MR. MALCOLM FRASER
  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND MEMBER FOR WANNON
         MARCH 8, 1970

      This week the Governor—General announced the 
Government's proposals for this autumn Parliamentary session.. 
There are more firm proposals in this speech than in any I 
have listened to since 1955. I will talk about this on 
another occasion. Today I want to talk about matters which 
are of intimate and direct concern to people who live in 
rural communities, to people who live on the farms.
      The wool industry is in a more difficult economic 
position than it has been since before the last World War.
      The causes of the present situation are complex and 
the solutions are not going to be easy to find. If the 
solutions were easy they would have been applied long before 
this.
      I want to try and isolate some of the factors that 
influence the present position, and which have been of such 
weight that they have more than counteracted the specific 
measures of help to the wool industry.
      By and large, the industry is efficient. I suppose 
any industry has an element of inefficiency attached to it. 
But the wool industry has over the years improved its 
productivity, and by increasing production and cutting costs 
farmers had done much to sustain their position despite a 
general trend of falling prices.

          2.
    In any normal time the particular aid provided
to the wool industry would, I believe, have been regarded 
as generous.
    In the last budget, a series of measures was
announced of benefit to the wool growing community and other 
rural producers. The superphosphate subsidy was lifted from 
$8.00 a ton to $12.00 a ton.
    The Budget introduced a further form of relief 
which will do much towards preventing farms being cut up 
because of the need to pay estate duty. The relief greatly 
reduces the Commonwealth estate duties payable on estates 
up to $250,000. It was not possible to have the measure 
implemented in the last session of Parliament, and it has 
been introduced in the current session to apply from September
24 last year. Safeguards have been introduced to prevent 
exploitation by "Collins Street farmers".
    From July this year the growers' levy for research 
and promotion will be halved (from two percent to one percent 
of the clip) and the Government's contribution doubled.
The Government will stand responsible to provide funds up 
to $27 million a year, saving woolgrowers about 51.40 a bale.
    When the last budget was framed it was not known 
that a new and ominous development was to take place. Following 
the drought, farmers were looking to good seasons and to a 
modest improvement in prices to enable themselves to re—establish 
their position. We have had the good season, but instead, of 
a modest improvement in prices we have had a dramatic fall in 
price of raw wool. For fine wool the fall has been about 12 
percent lower than last year while stronger types have fallen 
up to 30 percent.

           3.
    We now have a situation in which wool is selling 
at 1948 prices and with 1970 costs. I fully recognise the 
difficulty this poses for the wool industry. I do not know 
of any industry in Australia that could survive for long in 
equivalent circumstances.
    There is a good deal of talk about inflation. It 
is not, I think, generally realised that within our general 
policies of development of a high immigration program and 
rapid expansion in Australia that it is difficult to establish 
the circumstances in which there is no inflation. When there 
has been a period of no inflation there has generally been a 
level of unemployment beyond that which the general community 
would want to see. This was certainly the case in the pre—war 
years, when there was general depression and very high un- 
employment. What I am saying here is that within the general 
limits which I believe most Australians demand of development 
and high employment, it is difficult not to have some inflation 
in the community. But compare the rate of inflation in Australia 
over recent years with that of other countries. You will find 
that in the period 1953-68 the annual inflation rate in Australia 
was 2.4 percent compared with France and Japan, both with 3.9 
percent. In the more recent period 1963-1968 Australia was 
still performing reasonably well with 2.9 percent a year — against 
Japan with 5.3 percent, New Zealand with 4 percent, and Britain, 
which also had undergone an inflation rate increase to 4 percent. 
The U.S., while still falling short of ours, had increased to 
2.7 percent a year despite the fact that in that country there is 
relatively heavy unemployment.
    Not only have we done better in economic management in 
these terms than these other countries I have mentioned, but at 
the same time we have obtained higher levels of employment.

         4.
    I make this point only to indicate that I do not 
think it is a strong argument to say that inflation alone 
is responsible for the problems of the wool industry.
    Perhaps in recent times we have not recognised fully 
how much wool's competitive position has really changed in 
the last two decades. The change unfortunately found itself 
rooted in the very years that gave wool its greatest prosperity. 
The high wool—price years of the early 1950's encouraged the 
great synthetic chemical industries to find enormous capital 
sums involved in the development of synthetic substitutes. 
While initially their prices were high the tremendous growth 
of synthetics has enabled their prices to be steadily reduced, 
and I believe the falling prices of synthetics have in large 
measure set a ceiling on the price of wool — a ceiling that has 
been steadily falling.
    Part of the promotion plans for wool have been
designed to break the link between wool and synthetics. I
doubt if anyone can say if this plan has been entirely successful.
Too often woollen goods are hard to get, and too often the
latest techniques developed by C.S.I.R.O. and others are not
used as widely as they might be.
    The harsh fact remains: the price of synthetics has 
continued to fall and the price of wool has continued to fail. 
The problems thus created for the industry and for the Government 
are among the greatest confronting Australia.
    The purpose of this talk is to indicate my awareness 
of the problem, to show if I can that I am immensely concerned 
for the future of an industry that has been and remains of great 
importance to Australia. The important thing, of course, is to
find solutions.

                      5.

         In recent times there has been a great deal of 
questioning of the historic bases on which the wool industry 
has operated. In the search for solutions to the wool industry 
problems, some people are asserting that matters which have 
been accepted by the industry, if not for 100 years at least 
for decades, will need to be challenged. Twice within my
memory there have been referendums concerning the marketing of 
the Australian clip. I myself made no secret on the last of 
where my sympathies lay. Indeed, on an earlier occasion I went 
even further and argued in a symposium held in Brisbane that 
the auction system made little sense as a modern method of 
marketing. Some people are now asking whether the wool industry 
needs to establish the circumstances in which mills can be given 
the opportunity to order up to a year's supply of wool at the 
one time, knowing that price they will have to pay for it. Some 
claim that the wider use of core testing and sale by scientific 
description may well play a significant part in future 
developments for the industry.

         In recent times some spokesmen have been asking if 
there were an independent company established to sell growers' 
wool by tender, by fixed—price arrangement, by scientific 
description, how many growers would be prepared to ask that
company "will you handle my wool?". If such a company did
exist, they contend, it would be interesting to see how many 
growers knocked on its doors rather than adhere to the auction 
system.

         I am well aware that the movement started in Edenhope 
has its causes in a deep—seated concern for the future, and in 
a determination which I can understand and recognise that they 
are going to do everything they possibly can to secure a viable

future for the industry.

          6.

    This remains a major Government objective, and 
thus there will be a heavy responsibility not only on the 
industry's leaders with whom the Minister for Primary 
Industry negotiates, but also on the Government.

