<!--start metadata-->
Title: National development
Description: radio talks
Date: 6/11/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO SPEECH        3HA - Sunday, 5 November, 1967
MALCOLM FRASER      3YB — Thursday, 9 November, 1967



             NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT


     In the last week two major announcements have been made concerning 
Northern Development. For a considerable time the Commonwealth has had 
policies directed towards achieving a rapid development of northerni sources 
as far as is economically practicable. This policy has been aimed at 
achieving progress on several fronts and has sought to encourage private 
enterprise, especially in the mining and rural industries. Where Government 
expenditure has been necessary we have stepped in to provide additional 
resources. The face of Northern Australia is being changed by mining 
developments which are going to add very significantly to Australian industrial 
strength and to the value of our exports. For instances, by 1970 it is 
anticipated that more than three million tons of bauxite will be shipped 
from Weipa each year, and the Commonwealth has lent $3.27 million to the 
Queensland Government to help it develop the harbour and township at Weipa. 
At Gladstone, an alumina refinery has been built for Queensland Alumina Ltd. 
to refine the bauxite from Weipa. This plant will soon be able to treat 
more than 2 million tons of bauxite from Weipa a year.

     In Western Australia the major mining companies have iron ore export 
contracts which could prove to be worth more than $2,400 million over the 
next twenty years. The iron ore export contracts will create opportunities 
for permanent employment for up to 5,000 people. Just one example of the 
development which follows the establishment of such companies is the Hamersley 
project. It is based on the Mt. Tom Price deposit, 140 miles south of 
Roebourne in the Hamersley Ranges and the development of this centre includes 
a deepwater port at Dampier, a 179 mile railway and new towns at Mt. Tom 
Price and Dampier.

     But it should not be forgotten that more than 95% of Northern 
Australia is devoted to pastoral industry. Beef cattle is the major industry — 
in Queensland, the Northern Territory and the Kimberley districts there are 
more than 9 million head of cattle and this is about 60% of Australia's beef 
herds. This area produces over 80% of the beef which Australia exports. 
Conditions vary widely over the area but the industry has been helped very 
considerably in recent years by the beef roads scheme. This has had two 
substantial effects — it has made it possible to move cattle to market without 
walking half their weight off before they get to the meat works, and it has 
also made it possible to move cattle from drought stricken areas, so that
losses have been greatly reduced.

                  2.


     Up to the present time a significant beef road programme has been 
pursued, involving several hundreds of miles in Queensland and $16 million 
in Commonwealth funds. In Western Australia the Commonwealth has spent 
nearly $7 million and some 1400 miles of beef roads have been built. In the 
Northern Territory, the Commonwealth has spent $10.4 million since 1961 on its 
own initial beef roads programme which has been linked with State developments. 
The Commonwealth has also begun work on a further programme in the Territory 
which will cost about $14.3 million.

     Early in 1966 a further $3.9 million was approved for Western Australia 
and another $1.5 million for Queensland. This was an interim programme designed 
to precede a major $50 million programme which would be spread over the next 
seven years. In this programme, which the Prime Minister has only just announced, 
the Commonwealth will be providing $39.5 million to Queensland and $9.5 million 
to Western Australia, with $1 million going to South Australia most of which 
will be spent on the Birdsville Track.

     This expenditure has triggered off an expansion of private investment 
in the beef industry and has added significantly to the value of beef production. 
The major programme now announced will make yet another contribution to the 
profitability of the beef industry and will reduce still further the losses 
from droughts and enable new areas to be properly developed.

     The second significant announcement, concerning large scale irrigation 
projects in Western Australia and Queensland,was made by David Fairbairn, 
Minister for National Development. The most important of these was the decision 
to go ahead with Stage 2 of the Ord River Irrigation Project. This will 
ultimately enable 170,000 acres of land in the rich Kimberley region to be 
irrigated. The first stage was completed in 1962 and enabled about 12,000 
acres to be irrigated, which has made it possible to establish about 30 farms 
between 600-700 acres. In addition, a new town was built at Kunnamurra with 
a population of about 1,000. The first stage of the dam cost $17 million in 
total, of which the Commonwealth provided by far the major share. Results 
from these trial areas have been continuously more encouraging. The main crop 
so far has been cotton and the average yield per acre has increased over each 
of the last three years. Prospects for commercial production of grain sorghum 
also appear to be more encouraging than they were a year or two ago.

     The decision to go ahead with this project has been made possible in 
large measure by co—operation between the Commonwealth and Western Australian 
governments but in particular because of the work that has been carried out by 
the Kimberley Research Station which has done all the initial testing and proving
of crops. The major industry at present in the Kimberleys is, of course, cattle 
and it is hoped that in the longer terms the irrigation of this very large

•
                    3.


   area will provide substantial benefits for this industry. Much of the
   Kimberleys is in a good rainfall area but most of it falls in a brief period 
   of the year and for some months the food value of the normal pastures is very 
   poor. If economic supplementary feeding of some kind can be developed the 
   cattle industry in the Kimberleys would be revolutionised. The Commonwealth 
   share of the Stage 2 will be $48 million.

       The Emerald Irrigation Project was submitted to the Commonwealth by 
   the Queensland Government. This project would enable a range of crops including 
   cotton, sorghum, wheat and lucerne to be grown under irrigation. Subject to 
   further checks on certain aspects, the prospects for this project are sufficiently 
   encouraging to be included in the programme. Its cost should be about $20 
   million.

       These are two major irrigation projects and they will both add 
   significantly to the agricultural development of their respective areas. These 
   matters have been put to the Government on a number of occasions and that they 
   have been accepted now is a tribute to the persistence and effort of David 
   Fairbairn, the Minister for National Development, who has fought for these 
   projects for a considerable time.

       As part of the last election platform, the Commonwealth promised to 
   undertake a $50 million programme for the conservation of water in different 
   states. Under this programme, submissions were to be made to the Commonwealth 
   by the States and the $50 million was to be additional to expenditure that 
   would normally be undertaken by the States. The first of the two projects 
   which I have mentioned, the Ord River Irrigation Project, is to be considered 
   as outside the National Water Resources Development Programme and regarded 
   rather as a special northern development project. In other words, when the 
   various projects within the orbit of the election promise are decided upon, 
   they, together with the Ord Project, will involve a total expenditure by the 
   Commonwealth of $98 million.

