<!--start metadata-->
Title: Some facts about the anti-Vietnam campaign
Description: radio talks
Date: 8/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  Sp-4-A .xb ~•o.._ss~+•. p~~

                         8 September 1967

      SOME FACTS ABOUT THE ANTI—VIETNAM CAMPAIGN

        Statement by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser


    Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Wannon stated that over
recent months there has been a widespread campaign in Australia and in the 
United States to weaken our resolution in support of South Vietnam. Those 
who undertake this campaign have little interest in the truth and use 
falsified propaganda.

    Unfortunately, he said, it is very often difficult for well—meaning 
people to distinguish between the true and the false and thus it is quite 
possible for well—meaning people to lend their support, unwittingly, to 
these efforts. He then went on to cite one or two instances.
    Recently there was a widespread distribution of an American 
journal called "Ramparts", An Australian edition was published which was 
not identical to the American edition. On page 15 there is a picture of 
a Vietnamese child allegedly the victim of American military action. This 
picture was not in the American edition. The photograph was actually 
taken by a free—lance photographer called Horst Faas, It is a photograph of 
a 12 year old girl. The original picture was issued by the American 
Information Service and it was, in fact, a picture of a girl who had been 
orphaned by Viet Cong action in 1965 in an area in which there had been no 
United States activity. During the same attack 400 Vietnamese were killed, 
including scores of women and children, The photograph was originally 
published in "Life" Magazine with a proper inscription to it. Another 
photograph was also used in the magazine which had originally been taken 
by a photographer, George Szabo, in Saigon in March 1966; This was a picture 
of two orphan children in an orphanage in Saigon. The Viet Cong had thrown 
a hand grenade into a bus in which one of the children was riding with his 
parents, both of whom were killed. Here again the editors of "Ramparts" 
have alleged that these children have been wounded as the result of American 
action.

    Mr. Fraser said that although this is typical of the falsehood 
which is involved in much of this propaganda, it is not restricted to this 
field, A short while ago a correspondent for the Bertrand Russell Peace 
Foundation went to North Vietnam to gain evidence to be used at Mock Trials 
for alleged war crimes. The trials, held in Stockholm, found the United 
States, Australia, South Korea and New Zealand guilty of aggression. The 
report made by this correspondent was published in the reputable English 
journal, "The Economist". The magazine, however, made it quite plain that 
it wasn't one of its own correspondents but rather a correspondent for the 
Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation who had written the report. The article 
alleged that American bombing of the North had done a great deal to damage

•



                        2.


      Health Services and destroy hospitals. Mr. Fraser said that he knew for a fact 
      that the Americans go out of their way to avoid civilian targets and casualties. 
      Recently the article was quoted by a Member of tIe House of Representatives 
      and he claimed that the article was reputable because it had appeared in the 
      "Economist" and had been prepared by an "Economist" reporter. He didn't 
      mention, as the "Economist" did, that it wasn't an "Economist" reporter, 
      that the report was not compiled specifically for the "Economist" but for 
      the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation.

           Mr. Fraser then went on to say that these are just two instances
      of the manner in which people can be misled. The extent of the misunderstanding
      indicates the success of the general Communist plan to confuse the public
      mind about the Vietnam commitment. They hope that our resolution will weaken
      and that our determination will fail. The sooner they realise that there is
      no chance of success in this, the sooner there will be a possibility of
      peace in Vietnam.

