<!--start metadata-->
Title: Sovereignty
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 16/06/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                       3HA - 16th June. 
                                          - 19th Tune.

                         $OUREIGNTY
               By : Malcolm Fraser, Member fcr Waimea.

          Many centuries ego when kings or monarchs ruled by whet was 

called divine right and had absolute power in their own kingdoms, the 

term sovereignty was an easy one to define. If the word power 

unrestrained was substituted for it, it would mean almost exactl, the 

sew, thing.

          In the ancient times monarchs alone and by themselves had the

power of life and death over each individuel citizen. They had the 

power to tax, to Judge the rights and wrongs of individuals and the power
to make peace ox to make war. They tad th. power to over-ride every 

other authority in the land.
          With the slow strugele and the growth of democracy the power 

of monarchs came to be whittled away. The people themselves began to 

have certain powers and rights which they themselves exercised although 

even for a long while after this process had begun the monarchs still

hoe the power to veto any of the actions that the first parliaments 
were taking.

          Sovereignty once meant absolute power - divine right of kings. 

Today it is far more difficult to define the word "Sovereign". Theeen 

is our overeign and we respect her as much, if not mare, than any of her

predeceseors, but in the terms of power in the old-fashioned sense the 
has very little.

          In agland power rests with the karliammet of Westminieter the 

House of Commons and the House of Lords and these two together with the 

Courts of Law now exercise all the sovereign powers that were once 

possessed by the absolute monarch. It will be difficult to place 

sovereignty in any one place because the power is divided between the 

House of Commons, the House of Lords and the Courts of the Lend.

          In the United States power is still further divided. There is 

the kreeideut who carries out the executive functions which in Australia 

are carried out by our Federal Cabinet. There is then the Supreme

Court of the United States which even judges and interprets their 

constitution in ways that materially affect the power of different Govern 

meat bodies. There is the emerican House of Representatives and Senate 

which exercises the legislative functions of Government and then there 

is their sacred constitution (because to Americana their constitution is

              2 -


sacred) which says just whet Governmonts can do and what they canaot do. 

All of these bodies have part of the sovereign power but no one body 


alone is sovereign because Lae power is so divided.

   In Australia, we are used to calling the States soveleign because 

when self-government first came to this country the absolnLe power once 


exercised by the monarchs was given to the Legislative Pssemblies and


Councils in the different States.

   However, in 1901 the Status of their own free will gave up certain 

 Ortheirpowers to form the Australian Comaonwealth. A constitution has

defined the powers of the Comaonwealth while the remaining powers are in 


 the States bands. Once they had done this, the States by themselves were 

no longer sovereign because the sovereign power had been truly ,nd 

 permanently divided. This does not mean that the people in the States 

 do notexercise the full powers of self-government but it only means that 


 the people emit exert their influence through two parliements instead 

 of one - through the State Parliaments and through the Commonwealth 

 Parliament. This point is further emphasised by the fact that the 

 Commonwealth cannot alone and by itself take powe, away from the States. 

 Neither can any State alone and by itself take a power that has been 

 given to the Commonwealth away from the Commonwealth. If there are 

 arguments between one of the branches of Government sa to who should 

 exercise a certain power than those arguments will be settled in the 

 High Court or possibly in the Privy Council. In 1901 the States ceased 

 to be sovereign and to still talk$ as though they were, is to ignore the 


 realities of the present situation. The %ustralian people are sovereign 

 and they delegate their responsibility to two Parliaments - the State an 


 the Commonwealth Parliament Neither one of which alone can exercise th

 sovereign power as it was exercised in the true manner of the term by


 the unrestricted and unrestrained monarchs many centuries ago.

     Arguments between the branches of the GovernmsnL are settled in 


 the Courts and so wetind that sovereignty is divided between the State
                 ParlIament
 Parliaments, between the Commonwealth/and the Courts of the Land. In


 each of these bodies resides soma of the power that wee once exercisedb 


 absolute monarchs.

     The American constitution was based upon thewritings 
of a man called John Looks, dohn Locke believed that democsacy 
would be safest if power was divided. Be thought that this would 
prevent abuse which can come if any one person or body has too 
much authority.
     In the Akstralina constitution we perhapa find the 
avail underlying thew:tits. The division of power has meant thut 
it is now impossible to say accurately that sovereignty resides 
in this place or that place, in this Parliament or in that 
ierliament because quite truly each Parliament only exercises 
a part of what wee once referred to as the sovereign power. 
If we wanted to clay who was sovereign or where the sovereign 
power could be found, it would be fax truer to gay that it rested 
in the people and not in the karliament because it is the people 
of Australia who exercice their authority and power et elections 
Stal.e or Federal - and in this sense the ;Alstralinan people are 
truly sovereign even if tte States as States are not.


13/6/1957.

