<!--start metadata-->
Title: Relativities
Description: electoral talk
Date: 7/06/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                                                   AUSTRALIA L4:- EMBARGO: 5:00 pm

r
                                                                    h            -s•,* InVsi              r=, rul n rks,r1 nkl ti j                            -.a ti


        FOR MEDIA                                                                                                                                 SUNDAY, 7 JUNE, 1981


                                                                                 ELECTORATE TALK


        Nearly three years ago, the Commonwealth and all State 
        Governments decided to face up to the difficult problem of 
        relativities in financial assistance grants to the States, 
        and for the first time in Australia's history, to have a 
        comprehensive, independent review of the distribution of 
        those grants. We expect the recommendations of that so-called 
        review of relativities to be released within a few days.

        In all Federations, there is a significant problem that 
        arises from differences between member States; differences 
        in population, in size, in incomes, in economic development 
        and so on. In Australia, before the Second World War, each 
        State raised its own tax requirements, including income taxes. 
        There were very obvious differences in the abilities of the
        States. to _raise                                                     revenue and to provide services to their 
        residents. It was in recognition of this fact that the 
        Commonwealth Grants Commission was created in 1933. It Is 
        a unique institution among Federal systems. Its task is tO 
        assess claims by some States for special grants to compensate 
        them for their lower tax raising capacity, or their higher
     -costs, which prevent them from providing public services at 
        a standard equivalent to those available in the richer, more 
        popular States of New South Wales and Victoria.

        At various stages, all of the less popular States have been 
        claimant States and have received special grants. Since the 
        Second World War, the personal income tax has been collected 
        exclusively by the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth has given 
        back a large part of the revenue its gets in the form of 
        grants to the States. Initially, these grants simply
        reimbursed each State a given proportion of the income tax 
        revenue collected from its residents. Over time, the distribution 
        of the grants to the States has been adjusted with the agreement 
        of all States, to recognise the differences in their capacities 
        and costs, largely removing the need for the poorer States to 
        apply for special 'grants.

         It has always been difficult to decide how the total monies 
        available for the States should be divided between them. Over 
         the years, the decisions on this have reflected recommendations 
        of the independent Grants Commission, and investigations 
        undertaken co-operatively by Commonwealth and State officials. 
        There have however, been significant changes, particularly in 
         recent times in the distribution of population and in the 
         economic structure of Australia and of the various States.

                          2

So, at the Premiers' Conference in July, 1977, the States agreed 
that a major independent review of the distribution of grants 
should be undertaken. That is being done by the Grants
Commission, with the assistance of two additional associate 
Commissioners appointed for just this task.

At the next Premiers' Conference and Loan Council Meeting 
on the 19th of June, the recommendations for new relativities 
between the States will be a major agenda item. But by then, 
neither the Commonwealth nor the States will have had time to 
consider the report in detail. A detailed examination is 
essential,for the subject of this report is vital to the
future of all the States.

In the circumstances, I have willingly agreed to Lindsay Thompson's 
request that an additional Premier's Conference be held later 
in the year to discuss this matter more fully and in a more 
considered way. We are currently looking at possible dates 
during the Parliamentary recess for this additional Conference.

Nobody other than the Grants Commission itself yet knows what 
the recommendations will be, but there is widespread belief that 
it will recommend changes, possibly substantial changes, in 
the shares going to the various States. Of course, it cannot 
recommend a greater share for one State, without recommending 
a smaller share for others. How to implement the report's 
recommendations will be a difficult question, requiring an 
exceptionally high degree of consultation between the States. 
and between them and the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth is 
willing to assist the States in their discussion and 
decision-making, but it is at least as much a matter for 
co-operation between the States themselves, for ultimately' 
it is their shares, not the total of Commonwealth grants 
available to them that is at issue.
The statesmanship of the leaders   of all Governments in
Australia will be put to the test in the coming weeks. Decisions 
important to the very structure of our Federation will be at 
stake. Co-operation and consultation will be required in 
abundance.







                          ---000---

