<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural reconstruction
Description: Radio talk
Date: 9/05/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          TEXT OF RADIO TALK BY MA. MALCOL>I FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON

          SUNDAY 9 MAY
          THUi-{S .13 MAY

                   In the last week of the Parliament, the Rural Reconstruction
          Proposals were debated. These proposals provide for $100 million to 
          be made available for debt reconstruction; for farm build-up,purposes, 
          and for assistance to those who can not carry on on the land.

                   Some have expressed concern at the present limit of $100 million.
          For my own part, I have thought it important to get the Scheme launched 
          and begun in a sensible fashion. When the funds become exhausted, I
          have not the slightest doubt that all the states will ask for more. 
          The $100 million is really a starting price.
                   The proposals are designed to help people to stay on the 
          land who would not otherwise be able to do so.
                   The funds will be made available for debt reconstruction
          over twenty years at about 4%. The funds for farm build up purposes will be 
          lent over the same period at about 6i%. The States will be administering
          the Scheme. They basically had a choice of two proposals. Under one
•         proposal, the Commonwealth offered the States the '100 million at 3% rate 
          of interest. At the request of the States, the alternative offer was made
          of $75 million at 6% interest with the remaining $25 million being a 
          non-repayable grant. This was the proposal adopted by all states.
          This is therefore, the source of the funds being used in these 
          reconstruction proposals.

                   Additional funds are also going to be made available to the 
          Development Bank, to enable the Bank to lend funds for farm build up
          purposes for the first time. This will be a further source of finance.

                   Farmers applyins. for assistance may well fall into three

                                      2.


             categories.     There will be those who can bé assisted because the
             assistance will enable them to maintain or establish a viable enterprise.

             There will be those on the other end of the scale, whose debt 
             is so great that their enterprises are not viable. It will be possible
             to assist such groups under the rehabilitation proposals. It is also 
             probable that there will be a middle group, and that the success of 
             their enterprises will heavily depend on the future price of wool. 
             It may well be that they would be in difficulties if the price 
             remains at the present level of about 300 per lb, but that they 
             would become viable if the price rose to 35¢. Obviously the higher 
             the price, the more people from the bottom end of the scale will 
             have a chance to maintain a successful enterprise.

                       A good deal will depend on the interpretation of Clause 20 
             of the agreement with the States. If that Clause is interpreted 
             narrowly and meanly, many people could be denied assistance who 
             would get it if the Clause is interpreted broadly and generously.

                       At the moment it is very difficult to predict the
             future price of wool. Stocks overseas have run down, and it is
•            believed by many that the demand for wool will increase in the rest 
             of this year. However, I have not met anyone who will say positively
             that they are certain that the price will rise. There is some fear 
             that as the textile manufacturers come back into the market for raw 
             materials, they will go to synthetics instead. Thus it is possible 
             that some time may elapse before we get a clear outline of the future 
             price if this is so.

                       This middle group of farmers whose future viability is likely 
             to depend on some increase may well need what I have called bridging 
             finance until a decision can be more properly made whether or not 
             they come within the ambit of these reconstruction proposals.

•                                        3.

                       I made this suggestion in the Parliament, and I have asked 
             that the Minister for Primary Industry - the Deputy Leader of the 
             Country Party, Ian Sinclair, examine this matter. I hope he will 
             negotiate proposals with the Government.



                       I believe it very important that we now try to get a 
             better estimate than we have ever had of likely future price levels 
             and of the probable demand for wool in the future. There is no doubt 
             that some types of wool are in over supply. Armed with this information,
             the Industry and the Government would be able to make gore long range. 
•            and far-reaching policy decisions about the future of this industry 
             than they can now do. It is vital that they put themselves in this 
             position.


                       I regard this Scheme as important. It must be made to work. 
             The present problems of the wool industry not only affect farmers
             and their families, they affect whole communities;   they affect 
             Australia.


                       If there are any of you who would like my views in greater
 •           detail, or a copy of the Bill with Mr. Sinclair's speech, if they write 
             to me I will see that copies are sent on.





                                  ....o0o 

