<!--start metadata-->
Title: European common market
Description: press statement
Date: 6/08/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PRESS STATEMENT                                                  10

                                                          August 6th,1961
                        Today, I am going to talk about the United Kingdom, the 
              Common Market and the Commonwealth.
                        Many people have been concerned that if the United Kingdom 
              joins the Common Market the Commonwealth will not be the same.
              This is certainly true, but I think their fears are awakened because 
              they think the Commonwealth as a whole will be weakened as a result
              of England joining.  As opposed to this very strong arguments can 
              be made to show that if England stands aloof from Europe her power 
              will be reduced and her influence in the Councils of the world will
              gradually fade away.  If this is true it can then be said that 
              England can serve the Commonwealth as a whole by maintaining her 
              own strength from membership with the Common Market.
                        It is idle to think that this move, if it is carried 
              through, will not radically alter the Commonwealth. England will 
              be closely allied economically, and to some degree politically, 
              with Europe in a way that has not occurred before. Some 
              re-organization of Australia's trade will be inevitable as a result 
•             of England joining, and the extent of that re-organization will 
              depend upon the terms of entry that England may be able to negotiate. 
              This will give impetus to trends that have been evident since the 
              last war.
                        For example, from a defence point of view we no longer 
              look to the United Kingdom as our saviour in time of need. If there 
              was a world conflict the United Kingdom would be so busy in Europe
              that she would be able to offer us little assistance. If we were 
              going to get assistance that would come in from the United States, 
              and this is the reason why our defence has been allied with the 
              United States, more closely than with that of the United Kingdom. 
              Much of our equipment is now American, so that we would be able to 
•             use joint supply lines in time of need.
                          quite apart from defence the United Kingdom now takes 
              a smaller proportion of our export trade than she used to, and a 
              larger share than ever before is absorbed by Pacific countries. 
              This further lessens our dependance on traditional ties.
                         These are all matters that have come about because of 
              changes in the balance of power and because of geography. We are 
              not a European nation geographically and, ultimately, we must work 
              out our own destiny in this part of the world.
                         There are other reasons why the old idea of imperial
              preference was built around England as an industrial country 
              supplying the needs of the Commonwealth countries with the 
              Commonwealth supplying cheap food to the British consumer was in 
              the long run doomed to failure. Commonwealth countries like 
              Australia and Canada have destroyed this policy by their own
              efforts to establish industrial self—sufficiency. In the 
              industrial sphere we now manufacture many things that we once used 
              to import. We have high tariffs against many goods that come in
              from the United Kingdom.  Because of this policy, carried out

                                        -   2 -
              not only in Australia but in other members of the Commonwealth, 
              the United Kingdom has not been able to find an outlet for her 
              goods on a scale that she needs in this postwar era.
                        The United Kingdom's share of the world trade has been 
              falling, and it has been falling because she has been bound to some 
              extent to the Commonwealth countries by old imperial trade ties. 
              This is a matter of evolution of our own growing up that has again 
              resulted in some weakening of the traditional ties with the United 
              Kingdom. If the United Kingdom finally joins the Common Market 
              these moves that have been evident in the postwar years will be 
              given new impetus and it will be a supreme task for British diplomacy 
              to maintain a real meaning for the Commonwealth of Nations under 
              these circumstances.
                         If the Commonwealth countries have to pay a price for the 
              united Kingdom joining the Common Market, and we do not yet know 
              how heavy that price may be, they should, at the same time, reap 
              benefits from the United Kingdom joining. England joining the 
              Market will create an economic unit of well over 200 million and
•             possibly over 300 million people.   This is a market that has 
              been expanding more than any other in recent years. There will 
              be keen competition inside it, but also the opportunity for 
              expansion. The Common Market countries have also joined together 
              in some kind of a Parliament which, at the present, has limited
              functions but which ultimately may have wider functions. It will 
              tie countries like France, Germany and the United Kingdom together 
              in a way that 20 years ago one would have thought to be quite 
              impossible. This must be of great benefit to the Western Alliance. 
              If the Common Market is a success then its members should be able 
              to defend themselves and the cause of freedom would be well served. 
              Europe, and consequently the world, has been vulnerable to attacks 
              on its freedom in the past because the free countries of Europe 
•             have been divided and therefore weak in the defence of Europe. 
              Prevention of this is one of the strong motivating terms between 
              the points of the Common Market.
                         Through her membership the United Kingdom would be able 
              to maintain her influence in Europe, and through association in 
              Europe maintain her strength and ability to maintain the cause of 
              freedom. This is very much the reason why I believe it is
              necessary the United Kingdom join.
                          But let us look at the picture if the United Kingdom 
              does not join.
                          If she remains out of the market the Commonwealth of 
              Nations will still be changed. England would lose most of her 
              influence in Europe, her power would be greatly weakened, and the 
              major part she plays in the Councils of the world would be taken 
              by the Common Market countries. Economic progress in the Common 
              Market countries would outstrip progress in the United Kingdom. 
              Europe itself would be weaker and less able to defend itself.
                          We should remember that we don't serve our own interests
              well by requiring our strongest member to weaken herself on our

                                          3-
             account, and that is what asking the United Kingdom to stay out of 
             the Common Market would mean.
                      I would like to emphasise two other points. If there were 
             only economic considerations involved I would oppose the United 
             Kingdom's entry to the Common Market because I believe the price 
             that Australia and other Members of the Commonwealth will have to
             pay would be too high.  But the attraction is not only an economic 
             one, it is a political one in which countries like the United 
             Kingdom, France and Germany will be brought into close economic
             alignment leading to some political integration. If this is done 
             properly and adequately and with full trust it must enormously 
             strengthen Western Europe and the free institutions in Western 
             Europe and weld countries together that have, in the past, fought
             each other bitterly.  It could do much to dissolve the distrust 
             between France and Germany which, with some cause, is still 
             remembered by many Frenchmen. Distrust weakens the Western Alliance 
             and weakens the cause of freedom.
•                      Because of the great political benefits resulting from a 
             successful Common Market Australia should not in the ultimate 
             object to the United Kingdom entering the Common Market.
                       This talk assumes the success of the Common Market and 
             further anything that is said about the United Kingdom's entry to 
             the Common Market and its effect on Australia is hypothetical 
             because we do not actually know how the United Kingdom negotiations
             with the Common Market countries will go. We do not know what 
             terms, if any, the Common Market countries may offer. Thus, it 
             is impossible to gauge accurately the effect on Australia and 
             the amount of re-organization of Australia's overseas trade that
             would be necessary.  I can only say that I think the amount of 
•            re-organization necessary will be considerable.

