<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr Cope's resignation, parliamentary matters
Description: electorate radio talk
Date: 2/03/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL RADIO TALK EMBARGO; 640 p.m.
                         Sunday, 2nd March


      THE HON.- MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 

Mr Cope's Resignation


Last, Thursday the Federal Parliament erupted without precedent. As
a result Mr Speaker Cope resigned and Gordon Scholes from Geelong 
was elected Speaker later that day.

Press reports on Friday gave, I believe, a fair interpretation of 
what had happened.

The climax came when Clyde Cameron, the Minister for Labour was
called to order by the Speaker. Clyde Cameron said, "Look I don't 
give a damn what you say".

The Speaker three times asked the Minister to apologise. There were 
some signs that he was going to respond to the Speaker's request, but 
the Prime Minister intervened and answered for 4. Cameron and said "No."

The Speaker then followed normal practice and named Mr Cameron. If 
tradition had been followed, if centuries old convention had been
preserved, the Leader of the House would have moved that Mr Cameron 
be suspended from the House.

The Prime Minister would not allow Mr Daly to move that motion. The
Minister was protected by the government's majority and by the Prime 
Minister's decision.

Their own Speaker was dis-owned and destroyed.

The Prime Minister forgot that the Speaker is not an extension of the 
executive arm of government. He is there to see that the conduct of 
the House and government business is undertaken fairly, that there 
is equal protection for all members of parliament. Once a person 
becomes Speaker he ceases to be an active parliamentarian.

The Prime Minister forgot that if Parliament is to operate, it can 
only do so by general respect for-the Speaker and his office, by a
preservation of the rules and conventions which make the Parliament 
workable.

Rules and conventions were both broken by the Prime Minister. As a 
result of this and other events, I would believe that the general 
reputation of the Federal Parliament has never been as low, that
there has never been less respect for Parliament throughout the 
Australian community.

                             ..12

 We cannot blame the media or the Australian public for that We can 
 only blame the way in which the Parliament has operated in recent 
 times. The government and the Opposition both have a role to preserve 
 the status and dignity of Parliament. Not particularly in their own
 interests, but in the interests of the people of Australia whose ser- 
 vant the Parliament is


 There have been many occasions in which the Parliament has been quite 
 directly by-passed by this government. Policy matters which should, 
 have been referred to the Parliament have been executed without leg- 
 islative approval. Policy decisions, reports of major negotiations 
 have been announced by the Prime Minister to the media, instead of 
 directly to the Parliament. That in itself is breaking a convention.

 In Sir Robert Menzies' time, Ministers were rigorously told that pol- 
 icy decisions must first be announced in Parliament, and reports of 
visits overseas reported in the Parliament. It is within the power 
and prerogative of government to enhance the status of Parliament.

The government has failed to take its responsibility. The Prime 
Minister fails to understand that the Parliament will quickly become 
unworkable if the general conventions of the Parliament are not main- 
tained by both government and Opposition. There should henceforth 
be a determination by all members of Parliament to raise the status 
and general respect of the Parliament; to maintain the rules and con- 
ventions and respect properly owed to the Chair, to the Speaker who 
is the custodian of those rules and 'conventions.


I have pointed to the responsibility upon the government. There is 
also responsibility upon the Opposition which I am certain each mem- 
ber of the Opposition would want to sustain.


If the Parliament becomes unworkable by destruction of convention, 
Democracy itself becomes unworkable because Democracy rests much more
on adherence to convention than to the rigid application of rules and 
laws.


Parliamentary government is the most rational and sophisticated form 
of government yet devised. Its purpose is to preserve and enlarge 
the areas of individual freedom. Its privileges and freedoms were
won under duress, difficulty and civil war. Its traditions are cen- 
turies old.


Traditions give Parliament great strength. That strength will only 
prevail if those now in Parliament recognise that the continuation of 
Parliamentary government depends upon general support throughout the 
community, whether they believe particular actions are right or wrong, 
and on the general belief that the Parliament is there to act in the 
interests of all our people to preserve and enlarge freedom.

                                         3.

Parliament must show as it has never shown before that it is the 
honest servant of all Australians. Members of Parliament must strive 
as they have never striven before, to enhance the status, the general 
reputation of Parliament so that it can regain the respect and the 
general acceptance of all Australians.

There are many challenges to the preservation of Parliament. There 
are forces within our community, some of great power, that do not 
believe in Parliamentary government. There are economic and social
problems which the Parliament has not yet been able to solve.

These problems alone would be daunting for present legislators and 
Ministers. If we add to that list the problems created by the be- 
haviour of Parliament itself, the destruction of convention, the de- 
fiance ofreason, the pursuit of power without concern for the rights 
or privileges of minorities, then Australians will have little faith 
in the future of Australian Democracy.

