<!--start metadata-->
Title: Cain Labor government's probate tax
Description: electoral talk
Date: 11/07/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   EMBARGO: 5:00PM
~








          PRIME MINISTER


  FOR MEDIA          SUNDAY JULY 11 1982

             ELECTORATE TALK

  The Cain Labor Government's new probate tax is punitive and. 
  discriminatory. It is not just a tax, it is a confiscatory 
  appropriation. Thirty nine cents in the dollar is a punitive 
  rate by any measure, and the rate is the same whether you are 
  at the bottom or at the top.

  It is not a tax on the rich. The limit of $200,000 is not 
  high. Many ordinary people with a house and a superannuation 
  policy will be caught. People with a house and a small business 
  are almost certain to fall outside the limit. Without doubt, 
  probate will damage Victoria's economy enormously.

  If this new tax becomes law, it will cause an exodus from 
  Victoria, as retired people go off in even greater numbers 
  to Queensland. House and land values in Victoria will go down. 
  People will see the assets they have built up for themselves 
  and their families decline in value.

  Ironically, it is the ordinary home-owners and home-buyers
  in suburban Melbourne who will be amongst the hardest hit.
  The value of their homes will fall. Worse still, Mr Cain's
  new tax will stop people investing in Victoria. Who will start
  a business in Victoria if they cannot leave it to their children
  without probate? Mr Cain's probate discriminates against the
  family business, and takes away the incentive to work hard -
  the very thing which has helped build Australia up.

  No-one outside this State will want to invest in Victoria, 
  because every single dollar of assets which non-residents 
  hold in Victoria can be liable to probate at the full rate 
  of thirty nine cents in the dollar.

  Labor has claimed that probate will only hit a small percentage 
  of estates, but that claim seems largely guesswork, and when 
  you take account of the exemptions that are in the Bill, especially 
  the exemption for spouses, it is certain that a far higher 
  percentage of families will be hit.

  I am certain Mr Cain knows that exempting farmers from probate 
  will be divisive. It will lead to great resentment against the 
  farming community amongst those who are not exempt. Labor has 
  never understood, or sympathised, with our farming communities, 
  so Mr Cain would not care about arousing hostility towards;the 
  man on the, land. There is only one way to prevent this - to 
  withdraw probate duty altogether. I am sure farmers were exempted 
  because Mr Cain knows their returns are too low for them to put 
  aside money for probate. But by taxing others in this divisive


                              •2

                      - 2 -



way, especially small businesses, he has shown a blatant 
disregard for-them and for the community as a whole.

It is natural for people to want to build up assets and leave 
what they have accumulated to their families and children. 
Mr Cain's tax is socialism at its worst. Dogma has gone to 
his head. What can he be thinking of by exempting estates 
left Lx children to their parents and grandparents?

The natural thing is for parents to leave property to
their children. This is what Mr Cain should exempt and abandon 
this unnatural tax.

Victoria will be the only State with probate if Mr Cain goes 
ahead. Why does Mr Cain want probate when even Mr Wran has 
abolished it? If probate is imposed on Victorians, New South 
Wales and Queensland will be the beneficiaries as people leave 
the State of Victoria and take their assets with them.

Probate was always one of the most hated and vicious forms 
of tax, and Mr Cain's proposal, with its high rate and its 
selective exemptions, is a particularly vicious form of probate. 
Taxes on the living are high enough without taxing the dead.







                   ---o0a---

