<!--start metadata-->
Title: Employment
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 30/03/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                  n j-T I`~  /C
                                                  7.^ 1/-
                        V1,M41.241{  LB1â::  7 :'J£NtTi O°I 
           Last week I spoke about the existing employaent position 

 inside Australia. lia. Today I want to :asks a comparison between ',userolie 

now and lustralin 30 years ago, ÌI mokc this oomoa3rison not to compare 

what any particular Cavertum tt did then with whet 000 ,p rtioul r Govern- 

Lent does noN , wit to shop how far our knowledoe has advarded over the 

last 30 years. This is aomotting ta.at is trust not juat of .Austrr lia but 

of every country in the world. It is soamthino that givus no et erbet 

decal of oonfidonce in the future and which makes me believe thi.t we will
never see a return to the grim days that were more or loss acoepted as 
normal in toe 1930s.

           Pir1t of : 11, let us mays u look at whet used to happen in 

those days. oi rir the Oepresoion of 1930/31 uuem :lay a ut reached 2714 

of our work force. It took a long ti.ma to climb out of t pis dopreSsion 

and for employment to regain whet was st those times considered normal.

           In 1937 Mr, rarefy Cla+roy, one of the Ablest end fairest 

Members of the 0ppositicn,in fighting for a prosperity loading on the 

basic wags said that we had now reached what he called a position of 

normalcy, that the economy was sound and that industry could afford to 

puy a prosperity loading. Mr. Clarey got a 10/- increese in the basic 

wage at that time ono prosperity basis, but the Interesting factor is 

t i at the position of normalcy about which he spoke was a position of 

10% unemp1oy nt nt, a figure which we would not toter etc for on oomant 

with our present knowledge and with our sense of social juwt1c . I l s 3w 

quite well, that NO. . Clary would not support this fins; of statament slow, 

but it does show how tar our intention and ability to do Tao oohing about 

t hasc things too advanced from the 1930a. 1 , today wound be 400,000

people. Thera are at tile coat; just nude   or peoplo unemployed.

                The position of the 1ii3ue, and of roars before that had 

always been goii4 aani diffloure o448 Zox pu©ple seen employment and the 

mascot is not herd to find. Every Cuveru +nt of 'Liao world xsept to un 

orthodox practice of flnunoa. The Gave rïue u to lei vied their texon and the
Budget was a good one in their eyes it they spent all the money t.ì yb
raised - no oore nod no loss. Tho Ouoget had to be a balanced one and if 
a position of deflation or unamployts nt tended to Home about, Covern- 
ant tnoo a would fall at the same time. If Gv urxiut inoome fell under 
the rules which toay then thought to be the right ones, the Covern en t
expenditure alp.had to fall. That meant that Government works would be
curtailed and that the Goverru ant itself would employ less people, thus

adding to the number of those seeking walks This kind of action by the

                              2 -
Govlitenment=of those days quite cleerly teide4 to make the position of' 
unerilloyment worse. Today we have an anti/01y different outlook on the
part that Governmeet finance should play in the maintenance of full 
emeloyment.
         During eriOti4 or inflation soh-AA; we hi hud overtiw lest
9 LX 10 years, it Is the Government's job to collect more t then it 
actually spends tu that tiros to try and curb iuflation and to prevent the 
currency from loosing Its value. When it does this, the aovernment's 
indebtedness to the Commonwealth Bank whien acts as bunker to the (,overne 
ment should fall. On the other hand, if there ls any rim of dofletion 
or enemployment, then it la the Government's job nett° reduce its 
expenditure an would have 'lean on in the 1930s, but to try und inereuse
the demand for employment throughout the economy either by increasing 
its own works or giving general tax reductions.
         .eomebody asked as the other day - "how can a Governmeet spend 
=ore money when Goverument revenue is felling?" The point is that in 
times of deflation or unemployment, it is perfectly sound fiaance for 
the Covernment to borrow extra fund from the Commonwealth Ceotral Bank 
and there is teohnical machinery for doing thie which I don't an to
go Into at the eresent time. If you like, the analogy is the same in 
principle if you compere thic to a person who saves in good time for 
e rainy day and who draws thoee savings out in. times of e eeecial need
         This ()hangs iu attitude eed chanee in knowledge on behalf of 
Governments Is the most elenificent chin ge in Government finance policy 
which has ever taken elece. In the 19.5Gs. and before if there was a 
sigu or deflation, Gevernments themseltes would spend less. They would 
add to the uumbee of unemeloyed alit add to the Loth/ sue of deseair 
throughout the commueity. Today what we teen thought to be right we nse
regard as a barbarous and cruel method of finance end, from our
increesed knowledge we know how to give an added stimulus to the economy 
in times of emergency. We know how we can create more jobs by direct
or indirect Governmeet action. We know hoe to prevent unemployment 
snow-balline to mammoth proportioes as it did in the 10308. Present 
knowledge of governmental finance has given us a very real confidence
in the future, confidence in our ability to smooth out the ups and 
downs in our economy. People who can remember the grim dnyu of the
19308. eau take heart and courage from this change in Government 
thinking and practice.


25/W1958.

