<!--start metadata-->
Title: Government assistance to industry, conservation, employment of women
Description: Radio talk
Date: 25/09/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                          Sunday, 26 Sept 70 - 3HA
RADIO TALK                                Thursday, 1 Oct 70 - 3YB





     I would like to talk to you this week about Government assistance

to Australian industry   conservation of our flora and fauna..4. and 

an employment training scheme to help married and single women.




     This week the Minister for Trade and Industry and myself announced the 
establishment of a committee of top Australian businessmen to affect closer 
liaison between Government and industry on Defence production planning and 
equipment procurement.
     This has been done to give Australian industry greater opportunities 
to study Defence requirements in debth, and also to allow industry to 
submit proposals for the supply of these requirements from local sources.
     It also foreshadows a joint programme to achieve increased sales to 
American and other overseas defence industries. These sales would be an 
offset against Australian purchases of defence equipment from overseas 
firms.
     I am determined that Australian industry should play a larger part in 
Defence production. Already local industry has been awarded substantial 
contracts, or sub-contracts, on major Defence equipment projects. These 

include offset orders for local industry in connection with helicopters, 
submarines, vehicles, ships and communications equipment.
     The new committee will be chaired by Sir Ian McLennan, the Chairman 
of Broken Hill Proprietary Company, who led the Government sponisored missio
of businessmen to the United States late last year. ItJwill e a small 
standing group from the three Government Departments principally involved
     Defence, Supply and Trade and Industry.
     The Government will be looking to this committee for practical advice 
and as a liaison team for Australian industrial firms seeking increases 

in orders related to overseas purchases by the Government.
     An important feature of the committee's work will be to encourage 
firms to undertake work in Australia which will help advance Australian 
industrial technology. I see the committee developing and carrying out 
a coordinated programme aimed at:

              . Promoting increased overseas sales of Australian-built 
                equipment and components.
              . Encouraging cooperative research and development projects 
                between Australia and overseas industry.

              . Encouraging local firms to take on work in Australia for 
                overseas firms wishing to build up Australian content 

                of equipment or materiel for sale to our Armed Forces.

                  -2-

    It is Government's policy to increase, where practicable, the 
proportion of defence equipment produced in Australia. It is also the 
Government's aim to assist in developing Australian Defence production 
capability, together with the upgrading of Australia's industrial 
technology.
    However, I would like to sound one word of warning. In ogr approach 
to the matter of local production we must, as a nation, be more willing 
to discard the sluggish and unattractive projects. Government needs to 
exercise considerable responsibility in this direction.
     The Government also wants to avoid creating an expansion in any 
particular sector of industry that could subsequently remain a continuous 
burden on the Defence Vote and the nation. We want to avoid, where possibi 
creating captive Defence industries which rely solely on the Defence Vote 
for their solvency.
     I believe that the creation of the committee of businessmen will 
benefit both Government and Wuptr .ii Aust alia I believe its work will
minimise the risks to industry 7 while at the same time 
assisting develop a very necessary strong industrial base for Australia's 
national Defence capability.

     Conservation is one of the key words of the emerging '70's.
     There is a growing public awareness of the need to guard Australia'. 
native plants and animals and to protect them. There is also the real 
need to preserve our heritage if we are to keep attracting one of our 
largest industries... .tourism,ë
      Conservation is an old word that today has been given a new and 
popular meaning. Formerly, it was used in the context of the safeguarding 
of almost everything. It now stands by itself as the one word to express 
action taken to protect the natural environment.
      Many of Australia's native planta and animals are unique. They 
are not found anywhere else in the world. Sadly,,maar-have already become 
extinct or are threatened with extinction.
      I know that there are a great many people in Western Victoria who 
are fully aware of the problems concerning preservation of our flora and 
fauna. These people have been fighting for the establishment of National
Parks -                                for considerabl. 
time.
      I believe the greatest threat to our wildlife is not the killing 
of animals but the destruction of their habitat. An example of this is 
seen in the declining numbers of Australian wildfowl. The.b?breeding
grounds suffer from damming of rivers. Their dry season refuges

                                           -3-


   disappear with drainage for agriculture and flood mitigation. Land
for wildlif         serves sanctuaries or nUional parks, should e acquiredSow
r        In -tea             ..j1ÍF the land n eded may not be available.
          The Parliament is aware of the problem and has established a
Select Committee to look into Wild Life Conservation. This Committee is 
also taking a hard look at the effect of pesticides on wild life population
          The CSIRO Executive has formed an Environmental Quality Committee 
to assist with planning for future research.
          These are positive measures but it is obvious to me that 
conservation is both a national and State problem. Importantly, there is 
an urgent need for coordination of efforts by governments, local bodies, 
industry and individuals.
          WaxammximaxatxtkamxtzgaxwkommxsigNsratix2tacts
          We have come to the stage where quality of the environment and the 
unique wild life of Australia is being threatened. I believe the answer 
lies in a planned scheme of wild life management, an area under study by 
the CSIRO. Successful management of our wild life calls for adequate 
sanctuaries, flora and fauna reserves and national parks. I believe there 
is a need to investigate the adequacy of national parks and the effects of 
pollution and pesticides on our wildlife.
          With increasing population pressure generated by man, conservation 
of all natural resources is becoming inreasingly important.
          Future generations will depend upon the foresight of this age for 
the material and cultural richness of their environment.




          An Employment Training Scheme to assist married and single women 
who have been restricted by domestic responsibilities, but who have now 
reached a stage where they wish to enter employment, started this week.
          The scheme is designed to provide opportunity for women entering, 
or re-entering, the work force to gain nevessary vocational skills.
          It should assist the woman seeking broader interests whose family 
has grown up.
          It will obviously assist those women wishing to pick up the threads 
of a career which had been interrupted by marriage or the care of ageing 
parents. Others may need a family income supplement to raise living 
standards. The training scheme is broad enough to meet all these 
possibilities.
           Leaflets, outlining details of the scheme, are available from 
district employment offices, municipal authorities or by writing direct to

me at Parliament House, Canberra.         ....o

