<!--start metadata-->
Title: Censorship, abortion, Labor Party
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 13/08/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           BROADCAST:                         3HA Sunday, 13 August 
                                              3YB Thursday, 17 August 
                                              3LK Wednesday, 16 August


                It has become almost trite to say that we live in a 
           time of great change, but the expression is no less true
           because of that.  One of those areas of change with which 
           governments must remain constantly in touch is acceptable
           community standards.  Our attitudes to issues such as
•          censorship changes as the years go by. In many matters, 
           some of the hypocrisy of the Victorian age has given way to 
           frankness in the treatment of a whole range of subjects in 
           books and films and on television.
                These moral issues - censorship, abortion and others -
           are difficult ones for governments. Politicians must respond 
           to changes in people's attitudes with great caution, taking 
           care that in their enthusiasm for reform they do not destroy 
           the basic community values that underpin our way of life.
•               I believe that in the last few days, some of Australia's 
           politicians have so committed themselves in the areas of 
           censorship and abortion as to threaten the fundamental moral 
           basis of our society.
                First, Senator James McClelland declared at a forum 
           at Monash University this month that his party would abolish
           all censorship except for cinema advertising. In saying 
           this, I think Senator McClelland confirmed what many of us

                                                            .../2

                                   2.

          have suspected for a long time - that given the opportunity, 
          some political leaders in Australia would go far beyond the
          bounds of acceptable community standards in 1972. How you 
          can possibly believe that there should be no restriction 
          whatsoever on the material available to our children, I 
          cannot understand.
                In this respect I am convinced that Senator McClelland 
          and his colleagues are completely out of touch with the
•         Australian community.  The need to prevent some material 
          reaching the hands of children extends beyond the field of
          pornography.  It embraces excessive violence and, perhaps 
          worst of all, incitement for impressionable young minds to 
          reject lawful authority and that normal degree of discipline 
          which I believe it is necessary to maintain, both at school 
          and in the general community.
                Like many other people I believe that ideally adults 
          are capable of censoring for themselves the books, films and
0         other material that they may wish to see. But there is 
          available in the world today pornographic and violent material 
          so extreme that I am convinced most Australians would be 
          offended to have it inflicted upon them and their families.
                Only two days after Senator McClelland's statement, 
          his party's Victorian State Council changed its abortion law
          reform policy to allow for abortion on request. I hardly 
          need elaborate except to say that where a woman's life is 
          endangered by the continuation of a pregnancy, an abortion
          can today be legally performed. I might also add that abortion 
          on request is the publicly stated view of the Leader of the
         Opposition, Mr. Whitlam.                              .../3

                                  3.

               Even though the Federal policy of the Senator's party 
         says that its members should have a free vote on the issue, 
         the Victorian decision really amounts to a directive to
         members.   I say this confidently in view of the dominance 
         of the Victorian Branch on the party throughout Australia. 
         This has been demonstrated so many times.
               The whole tenor of the campaign against lawful authority, 
         against the rule of law, has been generated in Victoria. 
         Less than two years ago Mr. Whitlam offered advice to young 
         national servicemen which, if they had followed it, would
         have resulted in mutiny in the armed forces. And earlier 
         this year Mr. Whitlam, a lawyer, declared that draft dodging
         was not a crime.  Just to ensure that the Australian public 
         were aware of the pressures on Mr. Whitlam to commit the 
         Labor Party to breaking the law as a prelude to changing it, 
         the Victorian Branch endorsed a draft dodger as a candidate 
         for a Federal electorate in Melbourne.
•              It has now become perfectly clear that Senator McClelland 
         and his political colleagues are opposing everything in the 
         community which would retain an element of discipline or self
         restraint.  The results of this attitude could only succeed 
         in weakening the place of the family in the Australian community.
               I recently had cause to talk about some of these
         matters following the publicity given to the Australia Party's
         policy.  I believe that Party is unreasonable in its advocacy 
         of the abolition of censorship and the legalisation of abortion
         and prostitution.  But I recognise that the Australia Party 
         is most unlikely ever to achieve office and be in a position
         to implement its policies.
                                                               .../4

                                   4.

               However, the official Opposition is a very different
         kettle of fish.  As a party which Es Aires to govern Australia,
         its policies must be taken most seriously indeed. Adventures
         such as the abolition of censorship and the introduction of 
         abortion on request, in my view would be highly irresponsible 
         and would have tragic results for the nation and the traditional 
         family and moral values on which it rests.

•                               000000000000








•

