<!--start metadata-->
Title: Korea
Description: radio talk
Date: 22/09/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   Dividing the 600 mile long mountainous peninsula Hof Korea 
is the line of latitude known as the 38th parallel. North of 
this line is Communist—held North Korea, while to the south is 
the Republic of Korea, free, democratic, and a country of great 
importance to the posture of affairs in the Asian and Pacific 
region.
   The 38th parallel became notorious on June 25, 1950, when 
the North Korean Communists crossed the line and spilled down 
into the South. The line had been the political division since 
the Americans accepted the surrender of Japanese forces south 
of it, and the Russians took over from the Japanese north of 
it, at the end of World War II.
   The Communist thrust led to the first collective U.N. 
military action, as the troops of 16 nations were despatched to 
halt the Red advance.
   Arriving this week in Australia on a State visit President 
Park Chung Hee, of Korea, recalled that Australia was among the 
first of the U.N. member nations to send her armed forces ... 
army, R.A.A.F. and naval units were despatched .. to help stem 
the Communist advance into the south.
   Speaking at a luncheon given by the Prime Minister, Mr 
Gorton, President Park spoke of Korea's special links with 
Australia as a consequence of our part in the Korean War and 
because we are allied in fighting the Communists in Vietnam.
   In clear terms, without resort to extreme forms of 
expression, President Park laid down the manifesto of his country's 
place in the Asian and Pacific region and in its links with 
Australia.
   He said, 'Though Australia is half a world away from Korea, 
our two nations are very close to each other in spirit and heart. 
The new map for the dawning Asian and Pacific era which we and 
other like—minded free allies of the region are seeking will place 
our two countries closer than any other two neighbouring countries. 
I have steered my course from Seoul to Australia by the 
new chart of the Asian and Pacific region, building in my mind 
a bridge of friendship and partnership.' The President's visit 
is another chapter in the story of Australia's increasingly 
intimate links with the free countries of asia and the Pacific, 
andunderlines our part in developments affecting the shape of 
the region's future. Exchanges, co—operation at a variety

~r



                                                                                                                                                                                             -2-


                                     of levels, increasing economic links and discussion of regional
                                     and world problems will continue to mark Korean-Australian 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rations. Both countries with other nations are dedicated to
                                     the building of security, economic progress and the promotion
                                     of peace in the region.                 In his Canberra address, the President reflected the
                                     courage and fortitude of his people and their resolve to
                                     actively resist the tides of aggression.The South Korean leader had this to say: 'The history
                                     of man has shifted its stage to the Asian and Pacific area and
                                     it is now calling for those with a resolve to create a new civil-
                                     isation. I believe that it is incumbent upon our two countries
                                     to take the lead in bringing about an international community
                                     marked by harmonious regional co-operation where freedom, security
                                     and prosperity are guaranteed.'         As I said, the President spoke quietly, but there was OIPPIt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       01L-'k
                                     in his voice as he continued, and I quote - 'I would like to
                                     reiterate the truism that isolationism is not an effective
                                     means to preserve independence. The liberty and prosperity we
                                     achieve by blood and toil can be preserved only when the
                                     solidarity and unity of freedom-loving peoples is strengthened.
                                     Isolated weakness invites the wanton avarice of the aggressors.
                                     By demonstrating the unyielding solidarity of free peoples
                                     we will be able to curb their aggressive schemes. Our two nations,'
                                     the President went on, 'have undertaken with courage to help the
                                     Vietnamese people out of their unprecedented national ordeal.
                                     I am convinced that the courage and valour we have thus dis-
                                     played in our determined defence of freedom will prove
                                     strong enough to thwart the expansion of aggressive Communist
                                     forces attempting to make an inroad into the Asian and Pacific
                                     region from the north.' end of quote.
                                                                             In Canberra, President Park and Korean Government Ministers
                                     accompanying him had talks with Cabinet Ministers and fully
                                     reviewed regional and world events. Problems arising out of
                                     developments in Communist China were discussed and it wys agreed
                                     that the situation was uncertain and should be closely watched.
                                     The South Korean leader was assured of the Australian Govern-
                                     ment's support for the U.N. objective to bring about by peace-

           -3-

ful means the establishment of a unified, independent and 
democratic Korea under a representative form of government. 
The President and the Prime Minister Mr Gorton jointly declared 
that constitutional, social and economic progress in South 
Vietnam was all the more notable for having taken place while 
the war continued. They re-affirmed the determination of the two 
countries to play their part inclose consultation with their 
allies in assisting the people and the government of South 
Vietnam to defend themselves until a just and honourable peace 
was attained. The talks were particularly rewarding, as the 
joint communique was able to announce that it had been agreed 
to conclude an agreement for cultural and technical co-operation 
between the two countries as soon as practicable.
   The Korean people belongp a Fivilir-ation ranking as 
one of the oldest in the world. Sew of its ancient culture
remains„         ~~-•~ .•


   The Republic, long under the domination of Japan, has come 
a long way since 1945. Post-war reconstruction was on a massive 
scale, and in the past few years there has been swift expansion 
in agricultural and industrial output. It is hoped to achieve 
self-sufficiency in food grains by 1971. We have trading 
relationships with the South Koreans. In the last financial 
year we sold them goods valued at $8.4 million (mainly wool, 
dried milk, machinery)and our imports were worth $1.5 million.
   The country has been a recipient of Australian aid 
under a technical assistance program, and under the Colombo 
Plan 238 South Koreans have received training in Australia. 
Australia and Korea are both members of an important regional 
organisation affording contact over a wide field, A.S.P.A.C. - 
The Asian and Pacific Council, the multi-national association 
first put forward by South Korea itself in 1964. So AustrPlia 
and Korea, along wit' a number of other countries of the region, 
are linked in a desire to uphold and strengthen free institutions,
                          .../4

           -4-

to accelerate regional economic and social growth, to preserve 
national integrity and independence against threats and to widen 
and deepen mutual understanding 'without discrimination on the 
grounds of race, colour or creed.'
   President Park has been a vigorous leader of his people 
and a staunch voice ftymkfreedom in the region. He rose to the 
rank of general in the tough 600,000-strong Republic of Korea 
Army, the fourth largest Army in the world.
   Former President Svngman Rhee dominated the foreign policy 
of the Republic up until 1960,and at his downfall that year the 
country had diplomatic relations with 16 States. In his 1967 
New Year's Message to the National Assembly, President Park, 
who took office in 1963, said South Korea, after being an 
'international hermit', had changed its policy from a passive 
to an active one and was taking a leading role in the Asian and 
Pacific area. Today the Republic has diplomatic relations 
with 75 countries.
 Australia and South Korea have maintained good relations on a 
number of levels. They have been associated in such regional 
organisations ash. the Asian Development Bank. In the 
past 12 months parties of leading Koreans have visited Australia, 
including government ministers and a Korean goodwill and economic 
co-operation mission to South East Asia, seeking to promote trade 
and economic co-operation.
   In his Canberra speech and addressing the Prime Minister, 
President Park expressed his high admiration of Australians who 
he said were fulfilling under Mr Gorton's leadership a mission 
of expediting progress throughout the Asian and Pacific region. 
He was certain that the generations to come would applaud the 
important roles the Australians were playing today not only as 
creators of a new South Pacific civilisation but also as 
guardians of peace in the region.
                        ....15

            -5-


   Welcoming the Korean leader, Mr Gorton referred to the 
suffering of South Korea as a result of direct armed aggression. 
Today the Republic of Korea was proving twin deterrents against 
aggression and against subversion - the willingness and ability 
to resist by military force the breaching of a frontier or a 
demarcation line, and the determination to improve the economic 
living standards of the people.

