<!--start metadata-->
Title: Trade and export
Description: radio talk
Date: c1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


~



                                                                            Australia is the t                                                              most important trading nation in
                                                the world. The sea—lanes, carrying our exports to foreign markets 
                                                and bringing in needed imports, are our economic life—lines. Our 
                                                solvency depends on our ability to sell our products abroad to pay 
                                                for the imports essential to our development needs.
                                                                            We are a long way from our foreign markets and our sources 
                                                of import supply. It is readily seen, then, how important are the 
                                                international shipping services to our producers, whether primary 
                                                or secondary, exporters, importers, and the consumers. Freight 
                                                costs are high and have a significant effect on prices of goods 
                                                carried in ships. Involved are the condition of our economy, the 
                                                maintenance of our growth rate, the rise in population, the health
                                                of Our rural industries                                                             .    which produce about 70% of our total goods
                                                for export ... and the development of our secondary industries.
                                                                            We must sell to live. Our wool, wheat, sugar, dairy products, 
                                                manufactures of many kinds are shipped to the far—flung markets wherever 
                                                they can be found and developed ... we sell carpets to Canada ... soup 
                                                powders to Senegal .. beef to Bahrain .. and even sausages to Singapore.
                                                                            In the last financial year our exports earned us $3045 million, 
                                                and imports valued at $3268 million were shipped here from foreign 
                                                sources. In our balance-: of payments, the figure for freight and 
                                            'insurance payable on our imports in 1967 was $377 million. The 
                                                figure for freight and insurance on our exports is not recorded in 
                                                the balance of payments, but would be of similar magnitude.
                                                                            It is therefore of great interest when a reduction in shipping 
                                                freights .. incidentally, the first since 1936 ... are offered. The 
                                                reductions, announced for the Britain—Continent trade for the next 
                                                year, were offered despite increased stevedoring costs and several 
                                                disruptions to shipping services. Agreements negotiated with the 
                                                Conference lines based on the new rates will involve a saving of 70c. 
                                                a bale on wool shipped from Australia to Europe. In an average year 
                                                about 2,300,000 bales are shipped on this route, so the cost saving to 
                                                the wool industry would be $1.6 million. A freight rate decrease 
                                                applies is offered also for canned fruit, manufactured goods, beef 
                                                and butter, among other products.
                                                                            What happened to bring about this most welcome improvement 
                                                in freight rate. The magic word behind the freight rate decreases•





                                                                 77772

            -2-

is 'Rationalisation.' Briefly, rationalisation means the concen-
tration of shipping cargo into the smallest number of sailings
compatible with the needs of exporters.
    The story of its establishment goes back to 1964, when
the Federal Department of Trade and Industry made a study which
revealed that considerable savings could be made by operating and
scheduling all the ships in the Britain-Continent service as a single
fleet. This investigation took into account the flow of cargo,
reducing the number of port calls by each vessel on each voyage,
and eliminating duplication of port calls. The aim: improve the
efficiency and economy of the shipping service.
    The scheme was implemented in September 1966 by the Britain-
Continent Conference, in respect of sailings for the Australian trade.
    In July this year, the Chairman of the Australia-Europe
Shipping Conference, Mr Staniland, said changes for the better
had resulted in almost all areas of operations. In both outward from
Europe and homeward trades, the number of ports of loading and discharg-
ing in each voyage had been reduced significantly. Ships had loaded
at 12% fewer ports in Australia, and discharged at 20% fewer ports
in Europe. The average outward voyage took 3.26 days less, while
the northbound voyage (from Australia) was reduced by 6.2 days. This,
however, partly reflected the introduction of new vessels and the
improvement of cargo handling speeds compared with 1966.
    The freight-rate reductions were welcomed by Mr Campbell,
Chairman of the Federal Exporters Overseas Transport Committee. He
pointed out the potential benefits that could flow from efforts
to improve the presentation, handling and packaging of produbts for
export. Shipping companies would sympcthetically consider freight
reductions in cases which involved cost savings. Wool interests,
said Mr Campbell, well put forward a case, because of changes taking
place and which were likely to take place in handling and packing of wool.
    There are other changes which reflect a new era of development
in shipping as far as Australia is concerned. One of these is the

                              /3

                      -3


decision by the Federal Government to enter into the international
trade via a joint-venture arrangement within the north-bound
conference.
        Under this plan, a new Australian ship will enter into
the Japan-Australia trade with Japan's K-Line. It has been proposed
that the Japanese line also operate a ship under this arrangement to
provide a regular service by fast vessels.
        The Australian vessel is to be the roll-on roll-off design,
of the type operated by the ANL in the Australian coastal trade.
These vessels, which also have facilities for container handling
of cargoes, have reduced turnaround times and cargo handling costs.
        The vessel which will be built for Australia in the K-Line
arrangement is to be of 11,000 tons dead-weight, and will have facilities
for containers. Hopes have been expressed that the arrangement will
be in operation some time next year. It is also hoped that success
in the scheme would lead to further co-operation by the two countries
in this field, as it is the Government's policy to have Australian
ships in international trade when that could be shown to have reasonable
prospects of success.
        Investigations carried out for some time on the possibilities
of moving into the international shipping business had shown that
the best prospects were in trade with Japan, the country that is
our biggest trade customer. Last year Australia exported goods
valued at nearly $643 million to Japan, and our imports from Japan
were worth more than $343 million.
        Further investigations along these lines were given a
brief airing in Federal Parliament recently. The Prime Minister,
Mr Gorton was asked if there was any truth in reports that the
government intended to invest between $30 million and $40 million
in a British shipping company and have ships of the Australian
National Line operate in association with ships of the British
company.The Prime Minister replied that the Minister for Trade and
Industry, Mr McEwen who would be visiting Geneva soon on international•

•


                 -4-

      sugar talks would make inquiries in London 'relevant to possible 
      Australian participation in shipping.' He added that the Government 
      was interested in carrying some Australian goods in Australian ships, 
      as had been evidenced by arrangements made with the Japanese K-Line.
































t

