<!--start metadata-->
Title: Premiers' Conference
Description: electoral talk
Date: 3/05/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


             AüSTBALIA



        PRIME MINISTER
                              tr

FOR MEDIA            SUNDAY, MAY 3 1981

           ELECTORATE TALK



With the Premiers' "Conference tó be' he1_d- in Canberra tomorrow,, 
the decisions announced last Thursday fallowing the review 
of Commonwealth functions could not have been more timely. 
The review of Commonwealth functions has been more than a 
mere cost-cutting exercise. It has demonstrated that the 
Federal Government is determined to be more efficient. 
The various decisions in every area of .Government set the 
example to the States to follow our lead in the most
significant and far-reaching Ministerial review ever
undertaken by a Federal - Government. . ._.

What the Federal Government has dbne is not just a- shift 
of emphasis from the bureaucracy to private enterprise, or 
from the Commonwealth to the States_,- but proof that 'smaller-- 
Government can be achieved.-These decisions reflect our 
great pride and confidence in Australia. ` We are determined 
not to see Australia-undermined by inefficient bureaucracy' 
and higher taxes as has happened in some other countries. 
Australia has a great future ahead of it provided we act 
with commonsense and determination.

One of th-e mot important things to realise about the decisions 
I announced last week is that they are part of an approach 
which is producing major benefits for all Australians
these are the benefits of higher economic growth, leading 
to higher incomes, lower prices, more jobs and lower tax rates.

Special care has been taken to protect those underprivileged 
and disadvantaged in the community. More limited government 
is now encouraging massive job creation. Economic growth is 
on the rise and that is why the review of Commonwealth functions
was crucial if this trend was to be maintained, and the benefits
are not to be lost simply in expanding bureaucracy.

Three basic elements of Government activity have been concentrated 
on -'the size of public expenditure and taxation, the size of 
the public service, and the extent of regulation. As a result, 
some 350 decisions have been made.

The Commonwealth has not only reviewed its own regulatory
activities. Areas which could be easily or better done by
private enterprise or. the States are to be offered for sale
or transferred. The States, have, if anything, even more considerable
responsibilities in these areas, and I hope that the measures
that I have announced will act as a stimulus to the States to
review their own ectensive regulatory provisions.

                  2



 One area where functions presently being cònducted by the-
 Commonwealth are being transferred to the States is health. 
 The Commonwealth will continue to provide substantial financial 
 support for hospital facilities and community health services, 
 but from now on overall funds will no longer be tied to 
 particular purposes.

 State governments will have the right to decide the appropriate E 
 balancé of health care services, the level of services and 
 the extent to which health care has priority over the provision' 
 of other public goods and services.

 Not only has the Government decided on major reductions in its 
 own capital works area as an example of its expenditure 
 restraint, but it also believes that the most rigorous 
 controls must continue to be exerted over spending by 
 Commonwealth Departments and authorities.

 For instance, there will be a three per cent reduction in 
 real terms on the current level of expenditure of
 administrative and operational items for the coming
 financial year.

 The re-allocation of functions between the Commonwealth and 
 States, between Government and private sector, together with 
 decisions in relation to the Commonwealth's own activities 
 will result in a reduction of 10,000 to 11,000 Government 
 employees. There will also be a 2% reduction in the number 
 of Commonwealth Government employees in the areas subject 
 to staff ceilings, to be effected over the next two years. or- 
 To achieve a total reduction in staffing in the order of 
 17,000 over the next two years, a very large re-deployment 
 operation will be necessary.

 Obviously, the review of Commonwealth functions has been much 
 more than-an expenditure review exercise. Nevertheless, the 
 Government has regarded the review of Commonwealth functions 
 as making an important contribution to the objective of further 
 reining in Government spending to mâkë room for privatè sector 
 growth and pave the way for significant reduction in the
 burden of taxation.

-The decisions taken will mean an eventual saving in Budget 
 outlays of the order of $560 million. Government revenue 
 will be boosted from the sale of assets and a reduction 
 in industry tax concessions - saving $130 million.

 This Government's attitude to expenditure restraint again will 
 be firmly evidenced in its approach at the Premiers' Conference 
 tomorrow and the forthcoming Loan Council Meeting, and in oUr 
 determination to hold down outlays in the 1981/82 Budget.
 The decisions that have been announced from the review of
 Commonwealth functions will benefit all Australians. They are 
 a significant further expression of the Government's broad strategy 
 to achieve more jobs, lower taxes, lower inflation, higher economic 
 growth, higher wages and salaries and less centralised Government. 
 These decisions will strengthen Australia. They will make a significant 
 contribution to the important task of streamlining Government in the 
 1980s and beyond.

                ---000---

