<!--start metadata-->
Title: The crisis in business confidence
Description: electoral talk
Date: 17/05/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 ELECTORAL TALK                        For Sunday   17 May 75 Fn i°
                                         Thursday   22 May 75 = `r6







                THE CRISIS IN BUSINESS CONFIDENCE


 The figures which were issued this week for new capital invest- 

 ment by Australian industry were a measure of the loss of 

 confidence which has developed in the economic system over the 

 past year.



 New capital expenditure by business firms on buildings, plant, 

 equipment and other assets fell during the three months from 

 the already low level of the last half of last year.



 After allowing for seasonal conditions the fall was about one 

 and a half per cent, but that is before making any adjustment 

 for inflation.


 If account were taken in the loss of purchasing power of the 

 dollars spent during this quarter, compared with last year, 

 then the fall is quite steep.



 In fact, over the year and a half that the Government has been 

 collecting these statistics, this was the first fall. It 

 appears that the level of investment is now at its lowest 

 level for many years.


The factors at work here derive directly from the inflationary 

situation in Australia.


Borrowed money in Australia costs 13%, or 15%, or 18%,depending

on credit rating and the availability of funds high rates to 

cover high inflations

Industry needs to make a hefty profit to cover capital which 
costs this sort of price. A glance at the finance pages of the 
newspapers is a reminder that today profits are going down, 
not up.
Australians everywhere know that they or their grown sons and 
daughters, or their friends, are having trouble financing their 
homes, because of these high interest rates. Home ownership is 
slipping beyond the reach of young couples.
Not so many are aware of the impact which interest rates have 
on job security through their destruction of the capacity of 
private enterprise to replace worn out machinery or buy new 
equipment.
If firms contact their capital investment, they contract their 
employment. The figures which came out this week show how this 
is happening.
The Treasurer, Dr. Cairns, has given an indication that he is 
becoming aware that the Government's first problem is inflation. 
The unemployment which has flowed from it was only made worse 
by the inflationary measures which the Government has been 
taking so far.
Dr. Cairns has spoken of the need to make reductions in 
Government expenditure. Ìt is to be hoped that these indications 
of a more responsible approach to this strong inflationary factor 
of excess expenditure will be sustained through the budget 
discussions during the parliamentary winter recess.
I asked the Prime Minister about these statements by Dr. Cairns, 
but-he evaded giving a straightforward answer,-taking refuge 
in a point of parliamentary procedure.

The Prime Minister also brushed aside a question about 
comparable rates of inflation between Australia and other major 
trading nations.
In seven of these ten nations, the rate of inflation is forecast 
to decline this year. In the case of one of them, Japan, the 
decline is expected to be from 24.4% last year to 11.6% during 
1975.
The other six nations where inflation is going down this year 
are Canada, France, West Germany, the United States, the 
Netherlands and Switzerland.
The Government has claimed often enough in the past that 
Australia's inflation is at least partly imported, but the 
Prime Minister did not welcome it when asked when Australia 
would be importing deflation from her trading partners.
He evaded this question also, and well he might.
Despite the general downward movement in prices around the world, 
there are forecasts that in Australia the trend will remain 
upward, and that the rate of inflation could go as high as 300 
next year.

