<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry re-organisation
Description: press statement
Date: 19/05/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        1RESS STATEIENT : 


        T'∞ÔA LCOLM FRASER:


                                                               May 19th,1963



                                WOOL INDUSTRY RE-ORGANIZATION



                    The Central Authority for the wool industry has at last come into 
        being. It may be an indication of the size of the task involved in that it has 
        taken five months since the passage of the necessary Commonwealth legislation 
        to get the new Wool Board appointed and operating.


                    The two wool growing organizations represented on the Australian 
       Wool Industry Conference have chosen their representatives and the non-grower 
        representatives on the Board have been appointed by the Minister from names 
        suggested by the Wool Industry Conference.


                    Sir William Gunn, who has led the Australian Wool Board and 
        International Wool Secretariat for some years is the first Chairman of the new 
       Wool Board. As such, he will be the most powerful man ever to have come from the 
        ranks of the Australian Wool Industry. The new Wool Board will be taking over 
        the functions not only of the old Australian wool Bureau - which is also largely
ï       responsible for the International Wool Secretariat, but also it will assume the 
        functions of the Wool Research Committee and the Wool Testing Authority. Sub- 
       Committees of the Board will probably be appointed to administer these particular 
       functions.


                    Sir William Gunn has shown an acute insight into the needs of the 
       industry by publicly saying that one of the first tasks of the new Wool Board 
       will be the formation of a Marketing Committee to investigate all aspects of 
       wool marketing on a continuing basis, and to advise on measures to meet changing 
       market conditions.


                    It is well known that one of the wool grower organizations only 
       agreed to the formation of the new organization on the understanding that such 
       a Marketing Committee would be appointed. I believe it inevitable that this 
       Marketing Committee will recommend fundamental changes in the marketing of the 
       Australian wool clip.


                    These changes may be more radical than the floor price plan, which 
       has been fought for for so long by the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' 
       Federation, When this marketing Committee does make its recommendation I hope 
       le will be possible for the whole industry to accept and support them.


                    The new Wool Board will be a powerful voice for the industry in 
       dealing with any Government of the day. In the past grower organizations have 
       made their own individual representations to the Government on different matters. 
       Very often there has been no similarity of approach between the organizations.


                   While I am sure individual organizations will be able to have access 
       to the appropria±;e Government Ministers, it is quite clear that the main apps:-.ch 
       to the Government on matters of policy affecting the in<astry will come from the 
       Australian Wool Industry Conference via the Australian Wool Board.


                   The new organization will make it possible for a united approach to 
       be developed before putting matters to the Government. This puts the industry - 
       into a much more powerful position.


                    One matter which may be up for consideration is the question of a 
       Government contribution to wool promotion. Up to the present time the Government 
       has never made any direct contribution to promotion for any industry but it does
       make a considerable contribution to research. For example, for every £1.0.0, 
       the woolgrower pays into research the Government pays in £2. O. O.




                                                                           /2.

                                   2


                      I recently saw a report that one of the members of the 
Australian Wool Industry Conference said he believed that the Government 
should make a contribution to increase available funds for wool promotion. 
Quite clearly, if the suggestion is to have any success, it will have to be 
supported by a majority of members of the Australian Wool Industry Conference
and by the Australian Wool Board.    This is the channel through which such 
matters must be put to the Government.



                                 o0o

