<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool promotion
Description: press statement
Date: 12/02/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                          WOOL PROMOTION
                 By MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON
          Australians generally and wool growers in particular will 
have been glad to see the Wool Bureau's announcement of what is called
a new and energetic plan to sell wool to the world's markets. No one 
can quarrel with the basic aims of the new policy, which if we had had 
a little foresight show!d have been our policy for many years past.
          The three policy points announced were these:-
          (1)     To increase Australian consumption of wool.
          (2)     To help woollen mills establish export markets.
          (3)     To provide a stimulus for wool product development.
          I don't think the announcement of these three points as a 
great policy change mean as much as many people hope, because if anyone 
with a little knowledge on the subject had been asked years ago what 
was the function of the Wool Bureau, they would have replied in almost
precisely these terms.    What else can wool production mean? As 
for the third of these aims, the question of wool product development, 
this lies more in the province of the Wool Research Committee and 
CSIRO, which has already done magnificent work with limited resources 
in perfecting shrink and moth proofing and permanent crease techniques 
for woollen fabrics.
          Because the "plan" may not be as new as at first sight appears, 
does not necessarily mean that past criticisms of the Wool Bureau have
gone unheeded.   It appears that the Bureau under Mr. Gunn's chairman- 
ship is now about to bring an energy and initiative into the work that
has so far been sadly lacking.  The appointment of Miss Nan Saunders
as promotional expert lends weight to this view.  The most important
aspect of her job seems to be to develop a vigorous advertising 
campaign for wool in conjunction with manufacturer and retailer. 
This is vital and is something that has never happened in the past. 
          There was one point on which the Bureau announcement was
particularly vague.   It concerned finance.   Frankly, as i .hers

                                   2.

stand, I believe the Bureau's resources are totally inadequate for a 
successful promotion campaign which we hope to see undertaken not only 
in the Australian market of 10 million people but also in the far larger
markets overseas.  This must be done through the I.W.S., for which
Australia supplies 62% of the funds.  If we wish to save the wool 
industry, promotion overseas is more important than promotion in Australia.
          The funds available to the Bureau are these:-
          (1)     a levy of 4V- a bale on wool shorn in Australia, 
                  i.e. £800,000 (the remaining 2/- levy goes to the 
                  Wool Research Committee for research).
          (2)     a reserve of £4 million.
The I.W.S. spends well under £2 Million a year, made up from contributions 
from Australia, South Africa and New Zealand, and a further £1 Million
is contributed by wool textile manufacturers for joint promotion., Since
a major part of I.W.S. funds are supplied from Wool Bureau funds, it would 
seem the Wool Bureau has little left over for promotion in Australia.
          I am prepared to say categorically that a great industry with a 
basic turnover between £200 Million and £400 Million has never before had
its product so poorly promoted.   This may not have mattered when there 
was no substitute, but now there are many substitutes of differing quality. 
Their promoters, the great synthetic concerns, spend vast sums on 
promotion while we in the Australian wool industry make an annual 
contribution of less than £1 Million.
          No plan, however good, can succeed without adequate finance 
and that under present arrangements is not available unless the Wool
Bureau reserve of £4 Million be rapidly exhausted.  This would only be 
a short term solution because once the reserve was gone, the Bureau 
would be left penniless.
          The Wool Industry must take the initiative in raising more
finance.   If the total levy per bale were increased to £1, that would,
                                                                  ..../3

                                  3.

under present arrangements, give 18/- for promotion, leaving the 
present 2/- from the grower for research, (the Government also makes
a substantial contribution to research which is well financed). This
would give the Wool Bureau £ 2 Million to £4 Million annually. The 
Bureau would then have an immensely strengthened hand to go to
textile manufacturers and seek further positive financial co-operation
from them.   (Remember, the manufacturers have not such a vested interest 
in wool because in the long run they can convert machines to synthetic
fibre).    Finally, with such a fund, the industry could speak from 
strength to the retailer, many of whom don't care what materials they
sell.   If promotion created adequate demand for woollen goods, and 
if manufacturers were more enterprising in fabrics and design, the 
retailer would be forced to carry the goods in stock.
          It may be said that E1 a bale is too high when wool prices
are low.

          At present prices, it would represent only 2% of returns.
Therefore a 2% rise in price would cover this increased levy. If we 
are not prepared to spend money promoting our own product, we may well 
find that wool prices will tend to stay at depressingly low levels 
because we face severe competition from imaginatively advertised
products.     It's worth remembering that the retailers and manufacturers 
can switch over to substitutes with only relative inconvenience.
          For the average woolgrower there is no substitute. We
should be prepared to spend money to protect cur position.

