<!--start metadata-->
Title: Airforce, Defence Services, Federal Labor Party intervention into Victorian Branch
Description: Radio talk
Date: 20/09/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


"jRADIO,TALK                                              0   _ JYg   S 1-1/4'
      (By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member Por Vannon-and Minister for Defence)
          This week I would like to talk about the arrival in Australia of the new 
  Phantom F-4E aircraft for the RAAF ... my concern over some conditions in our
  Services ... the hi—jacking of civil airliners and events which led to certain 
  actions by the ALP Federal Executive against the Victorian Branch.
          At Amberley Air Base in Queensland I welcomed the arrival of the first flight 
  of Phantom F-4E bombers. Five aircraft we have leased from the United States, flown 
  by mixed RAAF and US Air Force crews, completed the last leg of a 9,500 mile flight 
  across the Pacific from the United States.
          The aircraft which arrived this week are the first of 24 that the Government 
  has leased to give the RAAF an effective strike akicraft. The Phantoms have been 
  leased because of further delays in the F-111 project.
          The Phantom is one of the most successful aircraft ever built and over 4,000 
  have been produced. They have proved themselves not only as tactical bombers but 
  also as air—to—air fighters. Different versions are used by the RAF, Japan, South 
  Korea and Israel. They have performed with distinction in the Vietnam War.
  Australian pilots I spoke with at Amberley this week praised the performance of the 
  aircraft. It was described to me as a very fine aircraft as modern and effective as 
  any military aircraft of its type operating in the world toíy.
          The 24 Phantoms we are getting are the latest models and are new aircraft 
  taken from the current production. The decision to lease the Phantom was made" 
  because the F-111 does not yet meet RAAF operational and technical requirements, as 
  I made clear in my Parliamentary statement on May 12th this year. The considerable 
  delays in the F-111 project and the lack of definition concerning future delays were - 
  prime factors in the Government's decision to lease the Phantom aircraft. We
  realised that we had to give the RAAF a modern and effective strike bomber force as
  quickly as possible a4   rt, • .      .. .        .. 4,—} almost as f;-Qr1 a ,,  --
,g, I44.7 After exhaustive evaluation and research in the fighter bomber field the 
  Phantom F-4E was selected.
          The leasing of these aircraft was one of the options I negotiated with the 
  United States. The initial lease can continue for-five years and is, I consider, 
  couched in highly flexible terms which are to Australia's advantage. The lease can 
 "be cancelled at any time or can be extended beyond the five years by negotiations 
  or it can be converted to a straight out purchase.
          Importantly in Austalia's Defence interests a necessary modern and effective 
  strike bomber force is being provided for our Air Force.

          Although the Government has made and will continue to make decisions concerning 
  new equipment and materiel for defence purposes there is one area at this stage that 
  gives me cause for concern. It is the area which covers the conditions of service

                                                                          ../2

                  2.
  for the men and women of our Armed Forces tom.
     First, let me make it clear that the basis on which any defence force rests
  is that body of men and women who are dedicated to the service of their country....
  in all ranks and in all three Services.
     Without highly skilled personnel manning our three Services ... without tight
  discipline ... our modern sophisticated weapons systems would be useless.
     You will no doubt agree that adequate well-trained manpower is fundamental
  to defence tey. But more than this is the need for servicemen and women who are
  highly motivated to a Service career. I believe the basic desire or motivation to
  serve in the forces can decay if conditions of service are not all they should be.
     With this in mind, I am convinced that the morale and well being of Servicemen
  and their dependents is an area that needs more attention and it is an area that
  causes me great concern.
     In the past week I had informal discussions with a number of Servicemen in
  three States. These discussions, together with other specialist advice, convinces me
  that while pay rates are an important factor in retaining the highly trained service
  personnel there are other factors in the conditions of service that need ut attentio
     These factors concern the married Serviceman with family and relate to
  disruptions of family life, particularly in relation to housing, education and too
  frequent postings or moves.
     After discussions with the Prime Minister and after advising Cabinet, I now
 emphasise that as a matter o11great importance I am preparing a paper seeking a
  major énquiry"into conditions of service.
     If I am successful in my bid for a major enquiry I believe it would need to be
  carried out objectively by men or women with relevant experience. Its terms of
  reference would need to be carefully drawn.
     I must make the point that there has never been a comprehensive in-depth
  analysis of what officers, for example, ought to be paid in the light of modern
  principles of salary fixing following study of all aspects of duties and responsibilities
  throughout the three Services.
     My Department is aware of this and that more comprehensive investigation is
  desirable.
     Meanwhile, at'my direction, the Department of Defence is seeking to act with
  all speed on such matters of importance to the morale of Servicemen as education
  allowances, removal allowances and rental allowances.
     I am concerned about the posting policy of the Services. I am not yet
  convinced that servicemen or women need to be moved as often as they are with ill-
  effects on families and school aged children.
     I am not convinced that the provision of housing for servicemen is adequate.



Tr                                ../3

                              ~S.
'The review, which concerns a number of Departments, will be concerned 
with reducing the delays in getting service housing to a minimum, the 
adequacy of arrangements under the Commonwealth/State Housing Agreement, 
whether the Commonwealth should go outside that Agreement to a greater 
extent than it now does in the provision of service housing, whether 
standards adequately reflect modern conditions and requirements for all 
ranks. Also included in the examination is a hiring system of houses 
as is used in the United Kingdom.
     However, the Enquiry will not be restricted to these matters. I 
hope that it may be prepared to make imaginative recommendations for the 
provision of housing to meet the needs of servicemen, who must be moved 
around at frequent intervals.

       Hi—jackings of civilian aircraft in various countries have given rise to a great 
 deal of concern by governments and the general public throughout the world. These 
 acts of air piracy have caused grave discomfort and danger to passengers and cost 
 millions of dollars in aircraft losses. The current spate of hi—jackings by Arab 
 guerrillas and the political demands they made on governments involved brought the 
 world's condemnation.
       This peculiar phenomenon of modern travel has caused a great deal of worry, and 
 there were some questions asked in the Parliament in Canberra during the week. What 
 were the Australian authorities doing to ensure as far as possible that order prevailed 
 with respect to Australian airlines and that all necessary precautions were taken?
       The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Cotton, said in common with other
 governments the Australian Government had taken steps at an international
 level to protect the security of aircraft, their crews and passengers. We had joined 
with other nations in the Montreal Declaration which condemned all acts directed against 
 the safety of civil aviation. Parliament had passed laws providing very severe 
penalties for offences against civil aircraft. We would continue to collaborate with 
other countries to find an international solution to the problem. In the meantime 
givil aviation and airline authorities would collaborate in maintaining the highest 
possible security standards.
       The continuing struggle for power by one Labor Party faction against the other
was headline news over the past weeks.' The Federal Executive of the A.L.P. — the 
body once referred to by Mr. Whitlam as '12 witless men' — has announced that the 
Victorian Branch has now been'dissolved' and had authorised officers of the Federal 
machine to be interim administrators.
       The very moves themselves by the Federal Body revealed deep divisions among thosE 
who were seeking to dissolve the Victorian Branch. The Federal camp had hopes of 
carrying out a manoeuvre that would place a new shine on the Party's face in Victoria
and thus produce new prospects in future elections. A council of 12 men was
appointed to recommend ways of re—building the Victorian Branch. One of these men is 
Dr. J. Cairns, the Victorian Labor member, who it might be recalled recently invited 
the North Vietnamese Paris negotiator, Madame Binh, and Viet Cong representatives to 
come to Australia and put th r case at the Moratorium. It is clear that one cannot 
foret811 what later events will bring. We shall just have to wait and see.

