<!--start metadata-->
Title: Conservation, pollution
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 30/07/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                3HA Sunday, 30 July 
                3YB Thursday, 3 August 
    BROADCAST   3CK Wednesday, 2 August


        A few weeks ago I spoke to you about two major
    Commonwealth Government decisions on the environment. One
    was to establish a committee of experts to advise the Commonwealth
    on environmental factors. P e other was that when there was
    any major Commonwealth development or State development
    for which Commonwealth funds were going to be allocated,
    there would, at the same time, be an impact statement
i   attached toArelevant cabinet submission making it quite
    plain to Ministers when they were taking the decision
    what the impact of the proposed development would be on the
    Australian environment.


        I don't think the significance of these announcements 
    which the Minister for the Environment, Mr. Howson, has made, 
    has been sufficiently recognised. The impact statements for 
    instance will have a major influence on a whole range of 
    Government decisions in the future.


        My recent visit to the Northern Territory made me 
    even more appreciative of the importance of the Governments 
    decisions in this matter of the environment. One of my 
    tasks in the Northern Territory was to officially open the 
    C.S.I.R.O's F.C. Pye Wild Life Research Laboratory in Darwin. 
    If the impact statements that will be required in cabinet 
    submissions are to have meaning they are going to have to 
    be based on the best possible research into the many environmental 
    factors involved. The Darwin laboratory will be a key centre 
    for the kind of research needed to provide well-informed impact 
    statements. All this made me realise that there has been a
                            /2

                2.

    change in emphasis in recent times in our concern for conservation.

        Many of us, of course, have had a life long concern 
    for the protection of our environment.

        In the 1950's and 1960's the over-riding objective 
    throughout Australia was economic advance and development. By the
•   late 1960's the need for greater protection of our environment had 
    become apparent throughout the Australian community.

        It is the way in which that concern has changed in the last 
    3 or 4 years that struck me so forcefully during my Northern 
    Territory visit. The greatest interest today appears to be 
    conditions in Australia's densley populated South East. 3 or 4 
    years ago I think you would have found more people expressing concern 
    about our native fauna and flora than about pollution in our cities. 
    I make this point simply to show that I think there has been a
•   change in the balance and emphasis of the public concern in 
    these particular areas.

        Urban pollution is a very real problem and must be tackled 
    with s11 the resources available to us. However, we don't want to 
    allow the present problems of pollution in the major areas of 
    population to detract energies and initiatives from the questions of 
    support and preservation of the natural environment.

        If we don't gain greater knowledge of the pressure
    of man's own presence and activities on the environment, then
    plainly damage will be done that cannot be undone.
                             ../3

                  3.
          Having said that, I think Australia has done better than 
    many other countries, partly through circumstances, partly through 
    population pressures and partly through the concern of many people.

          Economic advance is quite inevitable and cannot be held 
    back. Indeed, I think moves, which some would want to support, to 
    hold it back, are wrong. But although economic advance has long 
    since ceased to be a sufficient end in itself, without it we are not 
    going to have the resources to provide for the conservation necessary 
    to protect our natural environment.

          This principle is widely applicable. Economic progress
    is a pre-condition to so many things. Unless the economy is sound,
    Governments are unable to shoulder the burdens modern society thrusts
    upon them. For instance, we cannot continue to improve social
    services and welfare benefits unless we create an economic climate
    in which the private individual and private enterprise can prosper
•   and provide the community with the capacity to meet those improvements.
          Without the resources that will be needed for research 
    into Australia's fauna and flora, we won't be able to achieve necessary 
    and important objectives for the conservation of that fauna and flora.
          Conservation of the natural environment, protection 
    against the pressure of man's own activities, is essential for the 
    future of the quality of life in Australia. We will not be able to 
    achieve that without adequate research on which to base our decisions. 
    In this field, the CSIRO is an Australian leader.

