<!--start metadata-->
Title: The budget
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 10/08/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


/0/4r-~~ r  
:.  
~ 
 r -~/ 
~	
/
~:
CA LM iAaa , MEMBEÔ+ I+' W ";N%‚ClN
comments on  
Ti* BUDGET.
The Budget speech delivered last Tuesday night, by Sir Arthur  
Fadden makes hisstory. Firstly, it closes the fine personal career of one  
of Parliament's best-loved characters. It was Sir .Arthur's Lleventh Budget  
and, secondly, the Budget creates history because for the first time since  
this Government has been in office the federal Government is going to  
spend a110M, more than it will receive in revenues, Since this is the  
most important aspect of the Budget and since will be dealing with  
detailed parts of the Budget later, I would like to concentrate on the
implications of this large deficit.
The Federal Govoxn exit has budge3tted for this deficit for  
definite reasonsbut before explaining theses, would like to say what would  
have happened if the same con itionsted 'risen in the 1930's. The Govern- 
ment has been faced with falling revenue especially from income tax or4d  
more especially still from rumors whose income has fallen a record 33`N  
in one year. If this had been in the 1930's the Goverruneaa would have
resolutely said	
`'Because our revenue is falling our spending it also 
fall. We cannot possibly spend more than our revenue." That would have  
meant that Government works would have had to be curtailed: Go- ernui;n t  
employees would have had to be dismissed, all of which would heave had  
a disastrous effect throughout australie adding to unemployment and,  
pos< ably, even leading to depression, But this is not 1930 - it is 1958  
sad economic thinking and practice has changed very greatly to the ever- 
lasting benefit of the ihdividual and the community generally. The  
Government's attitude has been: "Our development must continue. The  
rate of Government works end of Government employment must, at all costs,  
continue so that a stimulus will be given to employment". Therefore,  
the Government is using what, in technical terms, is called Treasury  
Bill finance to fine the money for thin deficit which will mean that jobs  
and Government services will be assured and that Government developmental  
progruuzea will continue unabated. This will have a strong stabilising
effect throughout the whole of the o ommunity .
Ineteaa of adding to the forces of recosaion, the Government
has steadfastly set its course in the other direction ana will be doing  
a gr at deal tb maintain :xpansion.


          There is one point withh which I mule like to deal.


It could be aid that the Budget is cautious. There are squad seasons


for this.   If the Government had been prepared to budget fora greater 


deficit - and Ô am not denying that an argument OoulCA be made out for 


t pis at the present time, much greater concËssions could have been given 


to individuals either in the form of a taxation ,reduction or in the


form of a pecÌal`eoneestions. Nevertheless, at t?a present time, I 


believe that the Government's cautious approach has been Ñhey right one.



          With the present level of overseas prices, our overseas 


reserves cannot help falling. This won't matter if overseas prices 


pick up and if our overseas income) increases but there is no prospect



 of this happening in the immediate future.


           Greater concessions in the Budgetwould croate much greater 


 strain on our overseas reserves which therefore run do ri more quickly. 


           it may be that we will be faced with lower overseas prices


 for two or three years. If this isso  our overseas reserves which are 
                  £5a0lti
 at present over *cxt. will hay     to lust that time. It wolc be


 foolbeh for the Government to tote any action to increase the rate



 at which we will be drawing on these reserves.


           This is where there is one big difference between the internal


 finances of u country and between the balance of its overseas trade. 


 Treasury Bill finance is u perfectly legitimate way of maintaining an 


 even balance on the internal economy but once our overseas reserves 


 are run down there is only one =.ay to replace them and that is by 


 selling more goods abroad. Until the export position improves we



 must remain cautious.










 8/8/1858.

