<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget - education policy
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 10/09/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  3HA - Sunday, 10 September 
    BROADCAST     3YB - Thursday, 14 September 

                  3LK - Wednesday, 13 September




        In all the discussion on the recent Federal Budget, 

    a good deal of attention has been given to education and the 
    Commonwealth's financial provisions in this field.


        I have paid considerable attention to the new 
    scholarship schemes and particularly the new Senior Secondary 
    Scholarships which we have extended from 20,000 to 50,000, and, 
    of course, at the tertiary level, the new allocation of funds 
    in the Warrnambool Institute of Advanced Education has also 
~   received considerable publicity.


        These are two aspects of the unfolding Commonwealth 

    Education Policy of which I am sure most of you will be aware.


        However, I think I should draw some of the threads 

    of our education policy together in this talk and should 
    emphasise some of the decisions we have made which have received 
    little publicity in the last few weeks.


        Last month I made two statements to Parliament. The 
    first concerned the Commonwealth Education Programme for the 
•   current financial year and was an explanation of the education 
    provisions in the Treasurer's Budget. I will run quickly 
    through some of the points I made.


        In the last 4 years, the Commonwealth's direct 
    expenditure on education has more than doubled from $193 million 
    to $426 million.


        Next July our new 5-year $215 million programme for 

    capital development of Government and independent schools 
    gets under way - $167 million for Government school building 
    and $48 million for the independent sector.








                            .../2

                         - 2 -




               From the beginning of next year we will proceed with 
        our proposal to grant independent schools a basic level of 
        support for running costs on the basis of 40 per cent of the 
        cost of educating a child at a Government school. The 
        Commonwealth will pay half, and we hope States will match it.


               In the key area of education research, we will 
        increase expenc_iture by 21 per cent so that the Australian 
        Advisory Committee on Research and Development in Education 
        can support urgently needed local research into many important 
        areas of education.


               There is more money for child and adult migrant 
        education - from $6 million to more than $9 million. More 
        than half of this will help migrant children overcome the 
        disadvantage they have through a poor understanding of English.


               The Commonwealth's two major schemes for Aboriginal 
        children will also be stepped up.


               At the same time $12 million will be available in 
        the next 5 years for the development of projects concerning 
        Asian languages and culture.


•              The total number of scholarships will increase from 
        70,000 to 123,000. While the new Senior Secondary Scheme 
        will account for a large part of this increase, there will also 
        be substantial rises in the number of university scholarships, 
        later year awards, and advanced education scholarships, bringing 
        the total at the tertiary level to 21,300 new awards each year, 
        and maximum rates of living allowances will be raised and the 
        means test substantially eased.


               In 9 months time, the two Commonwealth Programmes 
        of unmatched grants for the building of teachers colleges —
        $54 million over 6 years for teachers colleges and $2.5 million





                                               .../3

                    - 3 -



      for pre-school teachers colleges will come to an end.

            The schemes have had a significant impact on the 
      training of teachers. For instance, the number of Government 
      teacher trainees has risen from 29,000 in 1968 to 42,000 
      in 1971 and the pupil/teacher ratio in classes throughout 
      Australia continues to fall.

            The Commonwealth has now decided to broaden and 
      expand its support for State teacher colleges. This means 
      that those teachers colleges which are being developed as 
      self-governing teacher institutions shall benefit through 
•     matching arrangements now applying to universities and colleges 
      of advanced education. This means a sharing of both capital 
      and recurrent costs of the colleges between the Commonwealth 
      and the States.

            The Australian Commission on Advanced Education 
      will report to the Government by next March on how this can 
      best be achieved.

            I should add here that the Commonwealth continues 
      to favour the provision of teacher education in multi-purpose 
      institutions wherever possible, and that is why I am so keen 
•     to see teacher education introduced at the Warrnambool
      Institute of Advanced Education.

            The Australian Commission on Advanced Education will 
      also look at the training of teachers of the handicapped 
      and special remedial teachers to examine the special requirements 
      of this area.

            A few days after I made that speech in Parliament 
      I presented the reports of the Australian Universities 
      Commission, the Australian Commission on Advanced Education, 
      and the Australian Research Grants Committee.




                                        .../4

                -4



         Total expenditure under the three programmes will be 
     $1,487 million in the 1973-75 triennium compared with $1,024 
     million in the 1970-72 triennium. The Commonwealth share has 
     risen from $487 million to $685 million.

         Perhaps the most significant feature is that in 
     presenting these to Parliament, I announced that the 
     Commonwealth had accepted all the financial recommendations 
     of the Universities Commission and all the recommendations of 
     the Advanced Education Commission as they apply to individual 
     colleges.

•        The greatest growth area is in the colleges of 
     advanced education - the programme has been boosted from 
     $252 million to $450 million.

         To give you an indication of this growth the 
     number of students enrolled in CAE's in 1970 was 37,600. 
     This is expected to reach 81,000 in 1975.

         I think this massive commitment to education proves 
     beyond doubt that the Commonwealth does not take it idly.

         It is our declared belief that investment in 
•    education is investment for the future. We must develop to 
     the full the natural resources we have available to us, and the 
     most valuable of those is our people.

