<!--start metadata-->
Title: Olympic Games
Description: radio talk
Date: 18/11/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    OLYMPIC 5iAus
                    LM        ME: E ' )OS: *,,,INN N.
           Athletes from nearly every country in th,„ world are 
gatheringin our own city - Melbourne. Not odit Victorians but all 
 ustralians are hosts to these people. The impressions that they gain
here will be taken bank into their own countries and into every corner
of the world. It is for us, for ev xy Australian, to make sure that 
their visit is successful, that it is happy and that they leeve us with 
good wishes and as ambassadors for UZI in their own countries.
           Melbourne has been transformed over the let 18 months 
in preparation for the visitors. It is true in the at there have been 
arguments over construction of this work or over the organisation in 
general but in recent weeks things seam to halie been going forward ith 
calm efficiency. Now only the finishing touches remain before the 
Olympic Games begin.
           Hotels and hoses have been given a coat of paint to 
look bright and clean for our visitors. The great olympic arena has 
been completed and the new stand has already held huge crowds for 
Football League finals.
           The modern rind futuristic swimmiegpool which we hope will 
see world records broken is a masterpiece of present-day arthitecture.' 
In addition to these, there are other smaller arenas for epeoiel events 
such as cycling and basketball.
           A complete village has been built for our visitors,
modern homes and conditions, and I think it has already been said that 
olympic athletes have never before been given such pleasant surroundinf
           In the arena the contest will be hard with athletes 
struggling to win honors for his or her own nation, but one of the chi( 
values of the Olympic Games is not that this nation or that nation wini 
the most gold medals or has the greatest number of successful athletes 
(although in the spirit of competitive sport these are important), the 
most vital thing is that people of all the countries of the world skàl 
meat each other and outside the arena develop real friendships. It ma; 
be thought difficult with the present tragic and disturbed events in 
Europe and the Middle East for all people to acc.pt wholeheartedly the
Olympic spirit but it is up to us as the Host nation to make sure that

                         2 IND

politics are kept apart from th. Olympic Cames: for only while this 
is so will the Olympic year continue to be one in which international 
goodwill and friendship is strengthened and one in which the woxld's 
best athletes may meet on any equal footing to test their skill and 
their strength to the utmost.
          Australia's hopes are high and we pray that John 
Lundy will be fit, one of our best athletes and certainly one of 
our greatest ambassadors wherOaver he goes. Australia's eyes 
will be on him in his two hard races and I think we wish him in 
particular every success and every bit of luck.
          In other events too, and in the swimming with such 
people as Lorraine Crapp, Faith Leech, John Marshall and Murray Rose, 
we have great chances of success.
          Visitors will be coming to Melbourne, not only from 
 all over Australia, but we hope from all over the world. I believe 
 that they will be impressed by our city and by our country. 
We have something to offer in this country which cannot be found 
 in any other part of the world and the Olympic Games could be 
 the beginning of u growing tourist trade to Australia.
           Our aim should be not to try and offer en imitation 
 of what a tourist can find in Europe but we should rather develop 
 our own natural resources in this respect. We have natural 
 geographic beauties and wonders in Australia which are unlike those 
 seen anywhere else and which axe unexcelled in any other part of
 the world. The Olympic Games can and should mean a great deal 
 to AUstralia. It is up to us as the Best Notion to see that they 
 are successful and the forerunner of continuous overseas visitors 
 to Australia.
                      .011••••^•••••^•^•^•••10
 12/11/1956.

