<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government budget
Description: Radio talk
Date: c1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


~


      RADIO TALK
      The first budget of the Australian Labor Party was a black 
      budget for everyone who lives in rural communities. 
      Before the last election, a number of promises had been
      made and I think that we would remember them.   They have
      all been put aside. Actions that the Government has taken
      tiroughout the course of this year have been hostile to the
      interests of the rural community, but there are many people
      who hope that the Government would recognise that a proper
      balance needs to be maintained within the Australian community,
      and that therefore policies would evolve that would assist
      people who live outside the great cities.
      Having listened to the budget, we know that that won't happen.
      Let's look at the decisions that were announced in the budget.
      There is an extra 50 per gallon on petrol for everyone.
      This is a highly inflationary measure because it will be
      added on to transport costs. It hits all people who live in
      the country much more than those who live in the cities who
      have available to them either public transport or who only
      have to travel short distances.
      In addition, another 2¢ a gallon will be added on in many
      country areas because of the change in the equalisation scheme,
      which, under the previous Government, kept the price in the
      country within 30 of city prices.
      Telephone charges and rentals have been increased. All rentals
      are going to be at the maximum rate and that will be a rise
      of 100` for most country people. This is quite unjust, especially

                         2

 in view of the fact that in the cities subscribers have 
 local call access to millions whilst those in country 
areas have local call access to some hundreds. The 
Government has abolished the provision in which the 
Department was progressively going to take over at 
Departmental expense the construction of lines of all 
subscribers within fifteen miles of an exchange. They 
have reduced that provision to within five miles of an 
exchange. The previous arrangement which we introduced 
some ,years ago was done to give some degree of equality 
to people in remote areas. The Government has taken 
this move without any sensitivity or nderstanding of
the problems of people who live        large distances
from the towns and cities.
Country newspapers will be very hard hit. They depend
on postage, unlike city newspapers which can be hand-delivered.
I believe many will find it difficult to continue in
business. With Doug Anthony,I pressed the Postmaster-
General to reverse the decision in the coursttof this
last week. He refused and revealed his plain hostility
to rural interests.
O   significant feature of the budget was the omission 
of any reference of assistance for local government in 
country areas. Before the election and during the first 
session of Parliament, the Labor Party indicated concern 
for the financial difficulties of local Government. There

                           - 3


is no financial provision made for it in this budget
and there was not even a mention of Portland as a study 
centre for decentralisation proposals in a subsequent 
statement made by the Minister for Urban and Regional 
Development.
These things might have been bad enough, but when we 
look at the changed depreciation allowances, we find 
that farmers have been tragically hit. The investment 
allowance on plant and equipment has been abolished. The 
depreciation allowance on plant and equipment has been 
seriously cut. These allowances were first introduced 
to encourage efficiency in Australian farming and they 
have been very effective in achieving that. iie had a 
system under which buildings, other than the domestic 
house, could be written off over a five-year period,
 n          -- - _ . c      ... _ -;ill per t b ee new
arrangements, the depreciation allowa ce      e ~~ or
3% a year - an almost useless provision.
Under the Liberal Government, internal subdivisional
fences could be written off in the year of expenditure,
as could vermin proof netting both internal and external
to the property, and boundary fences could be written
off over five years. Now they can only be written off
at 3% or 4 a year - again a useless provision. The
construction of dams, the provision of water supply for
stock, could be written off in the year in which expenditure
was undertaken because we recognised that Australia was a
dry continent and stock were often lost because of shortage
                                                        ...14

              4 -

of water, and the farming community needed encouragement to
make better provision for water conservation. That provision
has been abolished. I tried to find out from Treasury what
would be the new provision for dams and earth tanks.
Advice from one quarter was 'nil'; advice from another quarter
was they they 'didn't know"; and advice from another quarter
was that 'it might be 10;x'. If the Treasury doesn't know,
it shows how little consideration has been given to the
consequences of the Government's decision.
We had the provision in which haysheds and silos could be
written off in the year of expenditure. We did this because
fodder conservation on farms needed encoucagement, especially
is this important in dought-prone areas. That provision has
been abolished and replaced with a minimal depreciation rate.
When farmers look at these things in detail, when they come
to make judgements concerning the future improvement of
their property, they are going to find that the additional
cost will be very great indeed. This is particularly unfortunate
since incomes are now better and for the first time in a long
while, many farmers are in a position in which they would
have available some funds for farm development and improvement.
I have estimated the total cost that will be put upon the
farming community. When you take the changed depreciation
allowances, increased petrol taxes, increased telephone charges
and the abolition of the dairy subsidy, you will find that
the increased cost to farmers is about $200 million a year.

                          ...15

             5



I thought it important to catalogue these changes. It is
going to take some people some time to work out how much
their own individual positions are being directly affected
by this budget and the closer they go into it, the more
unhappy people will become.
These are the measures that affect individuals and communities.
There are still the major matters in the budget which
affect life in the city and inflation, and I will speak
on those topics in later talks.

