<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam, F-111 problems covered in visit abroad
Description: For press
Date: 30/04/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                     /1;67 30, XJ70
FOR PRESS
   VIETNAM, F-111 PROBLEMS COVERED IN VISIT ABROAD

    The Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence, Mr. 
Malcolm Fraser, said today he found a good spirit prevailing 
among Australian troops he visited in South Vietnam.

    He was commenting on his recent three—day visit there 
during which he had talks with South Vietnamese, U.S. and 
Australian civil and military authorities.

    Mr. Fraser flew by helicopter to the Australian Task 
Force Headquarters at Nui Dat and visited some of the field 
posts to get a first—hand impression of how things were going 
with the Australian troops in Phuoc Tuy province.

    He inspected some of the civic action work being 
done by the Australians including the start of a re—building 
plan for a village market place.

    At Vung Tau, Mr. Fraser said he inspected the hospital 
facilities and was greatly impressed with the standard of 
these and the concern of all those involved for the welfare 
of the wounded and ill.

    In Saigon he was thoroughly briefed on the progress 
of the war, on Vietnamisation and the pacification program.

    The Minister said on the advice given him, the process 
of Vietnamisation was proceeding efficiently.

    The South Vietnamese forces had been accepting 
greater and greater responsibility, and, according to 
information given him, the performance of their troops had 
been good.

    He discussed the matter of troop withdrawals with 
South Vietnamese leaders, the Australians and with General 
Abrams, the U.S. Commander, as well as Ambassador Bunker of 
the U.S.


                  ...72

t`                    3.

           An intensive round of discussions took place with the 
       American representatives in a frank and forthright atmosphere.

           Mr. Fraser said he had talks with U.S. Secretary for 
       Defense Mr Laird on three or four occasions and spent a 
       good deal of time with him on the last day in final discussions.

           It had become quite clear that there were differences 
       of view between the United States Air Force and the Australian 
       scientific and technological advisers.

           These differences arose as a result of the crash of 
       December 22, caused by the failure of a wing pivot fitting, 
       and new problems of fracture mechanics were now involved. 
       Inspection techniques had to be further developed and evaluated.

           At the end of the visit he issued a joint communique 
       with Secretary Laird in which the U.S. Government indicated 
       that it understood the particular Australian problems. 
       It therefore showed a willingness to make arrangements which 
       would ensure the technical and operational capability of the 
       FIIIC's was proven to agreed requirements before delivery to 
       Australia.

           It was agreed there was a necessity to delay delivery 
       of the FIIIC aircraft until present technical difficulties were 
       fully evaluated and corrected.

           Because of the uncertainty and time required to accomplish 
       these corrections, agreement had been made to provide to 
       Australia on a lease or other reimburseable basis up to 24 
       F4E Phantom aircraft for the interim period — should the 
       Australian Government so desire.

           A number of alternative courses of action which the 
       Australian Government could pursue to meet its strike aircraft 
       requirements were discussed and remained as options, said Mr. 
       Fraser.

            2.


   President Thieu understood and accepted the Australian 
position, and the talks he had with him were useful, Mr. 
Fraser said.

    Since the visit, President Nixon had announced the 
proposed withdrawal of 150,000 U.S. troops over the next 
twelve months and the Prime Minister, Mr Gorton, had informed 
Parliament that the Government had decided that one Australian 
infantry battalion and some supporting personnel would be 
withdrawn.

    This would be done by withdrawing, without replacement, 
the 8th Battalion which was scheduled to complete its tour of 
duty next November.

    To assist the growth in South Vietnamese self-reliance, 
a number of small mobile Army teams, totalling some 130 men, 
would be provided to work with the regional and popular forces 
in Phuoc Tuy.

    These teams would operate on a similar pattern to that 
developed by some members of the existing Australian Army 
Advisory Group, which would continue its work.

    A further proposal was being developed for Australia 
to provide instructors and other help to a South Vietnamese 
training centre for junior leaders of the popular and regional 
forces.

    Cabinet was also giving urgent attention to the results 
of comprehensive studies now being made of other forms of 
assistance which might be offered to South Vietnam.

    The major part of his visit abroad was spent in 
Washington, where he was accompanied by a high-powered 
Australian team, in examining all possible aspects of the 
problems besetting the FIII swing-wing bomber project.

