<!--start metadata-->
Title: The budget
Description: press statement
Date: 19/08/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS [ TA TENMNT:



/1A LC 0LM FRASE??




                                                         August 19th,1962



                                T
                               The BUDGET






            The general reception of the Budget seems to have been quiet. 

Nobody has become excited about it. Nobody's taxation has been affected.

Properly understood however the 196262/63 Budget is a bold one. It is 

designed to give a further stimulus to the economy by increasing the demand 

for employment to a level which Australians regard as acceptable.




            In addition to this it gives an incentive for development in 

certain specific directions, especially to Northern Australia, in a way that 

will not only increase employment in the areas concerned but also ultimately 

add to our export income. In doing this the long term employment prospects 

in Australia must clearly be improved. This is so because it is the export 

income of primary industries which makes it possible for secondary industries 

to employ the large proportion of our population.




           The Budget is a bold one because it budgets for a deficit of 

£118.3 million and, quite frankly, I don't think the presentation of the 

Budget made this point sufficiently clear. This, in fact, means that the 

Government is going to borrow £118 million from the Government's Bank — 

that is, the Reserve Bank of Australia.




           If the Government wasn't budgeting for a deficit, if it wasn't 

prepared to borrow this £118M, then Government  activities would have to be 

curtailed or development projects would have to be closed down or postponed 

for a later year. This would have reduced the amount of money available to 

people in Australia and would, therefore, have reduced the demand for goods 

and, still further, reduced the demand for employment in other directions.




           We don't always realise the difference between Government finance 

in the present period and Government finance of the 1930's. Before the war 

it was not respectable to have a deficit Budget. We always had to have what 

is called a Balanced Budget. That is, a Government's expenditure had to

match. its receipts in each year.  It would have been a matter for blame and 

criticism if a Government tried to spend more money than it collected in any 

one year.




           It is worth-thinking about this because the implications are cf 

great social significance. In the 1930's Government revenue started to fall. 

Australia's overseas income was falling; the income of individuals was

falling.   Individuals, if their own incomes were falling, spend less and thus 

there was less demand for goods and services, and this reduced the need for 

employment in certain directions and so you find the depressive tendency 

spreading throughout the economy. On top of this when the Government found 

its revenue falling, in accordance with the thinking of the day, it reduced

its expenditure or supplied less services.  It dismissed certain employees 

and those employees found they had no money to spend. So you find a great 

cumulative effect of everyone and the Government having less money to 

spend, resulting in less demand for goods and services. All this meant there 

was going to be less work and more people out of jobs.




           This sort of position will never happen again because we have learnt 

how to control the major effects of this kind of circumstance. Instead of the 

concept of the balanced Budget as in the 1930's we now have a concept of the 

Budget which is designed to cut the tops off the booms and even out any 

depressing tendency that might occur.




           If a Government is to do this through the Budget quite clearly it 

can't just have a balanced Budget each year. If there are signs of inflation 

it budgets for a surplus, that is it will collect more monies in one year than

it spends.  If, qn the other hand, as it is in the present, there is more






                                                                    /2.

                                   2

 unemployment than we like the government will give a stimulus to the economy 
 by budgetingfor a deficit; by borrowing from the Reserve Bank and by spend- 
 ing perhaps some of the funds that have been accumulated when it had been 
 necessary to Budget for a surplus. The fact that we are budgeting for a 
 deficit of £118M. this year means that we are putting into circulation £118M. 
 of new money, of money that would not have been spent - that would not find 
 its way to people's pockets as it will, if the Government had employed the 
 old concept of a balanced Budget.

          This is the central theme around which this Budget has been built.

          I also mentioned that the Budget was designed specifically to 
assist export industries or development that will enable our exports to
increase.   In broad terms the Government is trying to open up new resources 
by improving transport, whether it is beef roads or coal loading facilities 
at the ports. It is also trying to promote development in outlying areas 
which so many people regard as essential to the future defence of this
country.

          I would like to mention oue or two of the things on which money is 
being spent this year in these directions. Over £8M. will be spent on the 
Mt. Isa Railway to enable the full development of the mine to take place. 
£l.5 m. is being spent on the beef roads in Queensland. £l.75M. is being spent 
to develop the rich brigalow lands in the Fitzroy Basin in central Queensland. 
£4.5 m. is being spent on the standard-gauge railway between Kwinana and 
Kalgoorlie in West Australia. This is the first stage of the construction 
of a standard-gauge on this line, which will result in a steel works at 
Kwinana. £1m. is being spent on the Northern Territory beef roads.
£IM. on coal ports and £6M. on oil search. Funds totalling £26M. will be 
spent in development projects of these kinds.

         This does not make it a timid Budget. Looked at properly it is an 
imaginative one, doing a great deal to tackle some of the vast and difficult 
problems of the development of our remote regions.

         I don't believe these points were brought out sufficiently in the 
presentation of the Budget, and perhaps it is difficult to do this or to make 
these points stand clearly out in a speech of more than one hour, which must 
necessarily cover the whole of our nation's accounts.

         It is unfortunate perhaps that it is very easy to get into the habit 
of looking at a Budget in the light of the concessions it makes - a tax 
reduction for this person and an increase in payments to that person. 
Basically this should not be the means of judging a Budget. It should be 
judged on the basis of whether or not it maintains equity between different 
groups of people in the economy and whether it does what it should to maintain 
an even balance in the econcmy and that balance must always be a very fine 
point. If you go too far in one direction you find you are troubled by 
inflation, and if you go in the other you get the unhappiness of a depressed
economy.

         Finally, the Budget should be judged in the light of what it does
for the development of the country. If you measure this Budget by these 
three standards I believe it doesn't come out too badly.

