<!--start metadata-->
Title: Dairy industry
Description: radio talk
Date: 31/05/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    RADIO TALK                    f'?

          By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence.

          During the last two years, more than 5,000 dairy farmers have ceased 

    production in Australia. The industry is facing serious problems, with dairy farmers
    
    bedevilled by falling prices, rising costs, increasing competition for overseas markets,

    declining consumption, world surpluses and increasing use of substitutes. Stocks 

    of butter, for instance, continue to mount. The European Economic Community alone 

    has a butter surplus of around 300,000 tons or little short of half the world's annual 

    trade in butter.

          There appears to be nothing ahead to brighten this picture, and indeed 

    things could get worse. I am thinking of the possible entry of Britain into the 

    European Economic Community and the potential effects on our export trade. As things 

    now stand, the British market - the biggest for our dairy products - is limited by 

    quotas which require restraint by Australia, New Zealand and other suppliers. In 

    Australia we are eating less butterfat per person, while in most States consumption 

    of fluid milk per head remains static. Prices have fallen, despite the continued 

    payment of the Commonwealth subsidy o $27 million a year on butter and cheese 

    production. In 1964-5 the equalised return - from home market and export sales- 

    to producers was 47.1 cents a lb. butterfat. In this current year it has fallen to

    41.3 cents. Over this period, according to an expert official index, costs to farmers

    rose by 16 1/2 percent.

          A number of farmers were able to find capital to improve their farms 

    and those prominent in productivity improvements were able to maintain or even 

    better their financial position. But there are a large number of dairy farmers who 

    have not been able to keep pace with the changes and their incomes have suffered 

    severely. The economic examination of the dairy industry by the Bureau of 

    Agricultural Economics in 1964 showed that about 55 percent of all dairy farmers 

    earned a net farm income of less than $2000 a year. The manufacturing producers - 

    those who do not sell their product in the higher-priced fluid milk market - were in 

    an even worse position. Nothing has happened since that survey, I am informed, that 

    has improved the situation.

          On May 26, the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Doug. Anthony addressed 

    the annual conference of the Victorian Dairyfarmers Association. He said that the 

    butter production this year in Australia would reach a record 220,000 tons, of which 

    Victorian production accounted for 140,000 tons. In 1970-71 Australian production 

    could reach 230,000 tons. The Minister cautioned on the potentially unfavourable 

    effects of such rising production. In view of the present world situation, he said, 

    any increase in production must lead to further sales at uneconomic prices and a 

    consequential reduction in unit returns to the producers.

          In the face of its problems, the industry itself has taken action. In 

    October, 1966, the Australian Dairy Industry Council submitted a number of proposals

    to the Commonwealth for renewal of the industry's stabilisation plan for five years


                                     ../2

                           2.
from July 1967. The industry asked the Federal Government to provide funds for 
distribution in conjunction with State Governments to provide for re—construction 
of dairyfarm units which were uneconomic because of size.
         Recently in Parliament the Minister for Primary Industry, outlined the
Commonwealth's proposals in the Marginal Dairy Farmers Agreements Bill 1970. Debate
on the bill was adjourned and the Government hopes it will be passed soon. Main aims
of the proposals are (one) to enable low income dairyfarmers who wish to do so to
leave the industry and to receive a fair price for their land and improvements (two)
to enable other farmers to acquire land and any improvements they consider useful
so that they can build up their holdings to an economic size. In making the land
available, disposal would be made so as to encourage the most practicable and
economic use of land with a view to diversifying production — turning the land over to,
say, mixed farming, or forestry.
         The Commonwealth has offered to provide $25 million to the States for use
over four years to implement the scheme. Half of this would be non—repayable grants, 
half of it loans. The proposal is that the money would be used to pay those farmers 
who voluntarily agreed to sell their farms. The farmers who buy in to build up their 
holdings would not have to pay for those improvements on the property they did not 
want. These would simply be written off. As the 'expanding' farmer makes repayments 
to the State authority involved, the State would repay half of these proceeds to the 
Commonwealth. The rest would be regarded as a non—repayable grant.
         To make the scheme work, separate agreements with each State will be
necessary. I emphasise that there is no compulsion for any State to join, or any
dairyfarmer to become involved; it is completely voluntary. So far only one —
 Western Australia — has agreed to come into the scheme and the Minister tabled in the
House a copy of the Commonwealth's agreement with that State.
         Other Premiers have indicated their support for the principles of the
Scheme but what I would hope for now is the active support of all the States. I hope
they will all join in. The Scheme should prove of benefit to individual dairyfarmers.
         If — assuming the States accept it — the Scheme is implemented but does
not work as intended, then perhaps we would have to examine it and find out why.
         Some States have already implemented Schemes to combat regional low—income
problems, and those in New South Wales and Western Australia have brought some relief.
The Commonwealth is willing to make available supplementary grants on these two
States from within the total funds it is offering.
         The low—income dairyfarmer problem affects all States, some more than others.
The whole economy of some regions — notably in south eastern Queensland, northern
New South Wales, south—west Western Australia and to a lesser extent in the south—east
of South Australia — has been adversely affected.
         What is a marginal dairyfarm? The legislation defines such a farm as
having four characteristics. One is that it must, e course, be a rural property.
Secondly, it must carry a minimum number of lactating cows — 20 it is proposed; thus

                 3.


   eliminating those farmers who are merely running a small number of cows as a

   side-line.

         At least half of the gross income of the farm must be derived from the 

   production of milk or cream sold at the manufacturing price. Fourthly, the farm will 

   be - in the opinion of the State authority operating the Scheme - not reasonably 

   capable of producing to a level agreed between the Commonwealth and the State.

   The Agreement with Western Australia, for instance, lays down that this level will be 

   a production of 12,000 lb. of butterfat on _average per year. But in this matter 

   the Commonwealth would be guided largely by the advice of the State itself.

         The Scheme is designed essentially to assist the low income farmer in the 
             
   manufacturing sector of the industry. This is the area of the industry which has been

   host severely hit by the combination of low export prices and of rising costs.

   However, low income producers in the fluid milk sector are not debarred from the Scheme, 

   and more than half the total number of dairyfarmers in Australia are eligible to take 

   part in it.

         A I have indicated, it is a voluntary scheme, a scheme in which there 

   must be a willing seller and a willing buyer. Let us take an example to show how the 

   scheme might work. Farmer A has 60 head of cows, about 40 of them milkers. He wants 

   to stay on farming, but wants to make a better go of it. Next door Farmer B has asmaller 

   property with only 25 milkers, and having a rough time-of it financially. Farmer B 

   wants to sell out and buy a house in town and get going in a small business. He 

   finds, however, that prospective buyers want him to provide second-mortgage finance 

   of around $6000, which would leave him short of cash for his own plans. Then Farmer A 

   and Farmer B get together and consider they've got a proposition for the re-Construction 

   scheme - and so they approach the State authority for help. The Authority puts 

   a value on the place, and Farmer B accepts the offer, which is free of agents' fees. 

   Farmer A finds he really does not need the bails, some sheds and other items on Farmer 

   B's block, and the Authority agrees to write these off to the value of $2000. The land 

   and the rest of the improvements Farmer A decides to buy - instead of leasing - 

   and the Authority arranges for him to pay these off over a spread period, with terms 

   laid down by the State.

   I very much hope that all the States now standing out of the

scheme will accept it and be a part of it. But it needs to

be remembered that it is entirely voluntary and no compulsion is involved 
   
so far as any farmer or any State is concerned. As I have already said if the scheme

does not work as we hope, once it has been given a try it will then

be possible to review it and see if it needed amendment.

