<!--start metadata-->
Title: Visit of McMahon to the United States, trade, defence
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 14/11/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  RADIO BROADCAST BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER MEMBER FOR WANNON AND MINISTER
  FOR EDUCATION AND SCIENCE               v 11
                              3HA SUNDAY --eettann 14
                              3YB THURSDAY o I:`R 18
                              3LK MONDAY OCTOBER 15, 1971.
  The visit of the Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon to the United States and 
  Britain has been undertaken at a time of great importance to Australia.

  He returns next Thursday after top level discussions with President Nixon, 
  Prime Minister Heath, and leading officials of both the American and 
  United Kingdom Governments.

  We should be honoured that our relationship with the United States is such
  that the President wished to consult with the Australian Prime Minister 
  during this period of policy re-examination.

• The issues which lie behind the visit of Mr. McMahon are both economic and
  political. The economic issues particularly concern the present dispute 
  between the United States and the major European countries, and the measures 
  which the U.S.A. has introduced to protect its economy.

  It needs to be understood that these measures have in fact been made 
  necessary by the policies of some other countries, and by the continuing 
  heavy defence and foreign aid burdens which the United States has assumed 
  to the present time.

  Whatever may be the reasons for the United States' actions, the fact
  remains that we have a dispute between the greatest trading countries of
. the world. The Prime Minister has pointed out the very real needs and
  concern of Australia, for which international trade and capital flows 
  are so important.

  We are not what is generally termed a party principal to the dispute.
  We are not a member of the "group of ten". And we cannot therefore directly 
  affect policy negotiations, in arguments between the United States and 
  Europe. But we are well aware that traders and financiers around the world 
  are operating in conditions of great uncertainty, and we have a view that 
  must be expressed.

  The Prime Minister has pointed out, quite forcibly, that if these issues 
  are not resolved quickly, there will be a real risk of a run-down in world 
  trade. Indeed, if the measures introduced in the United States are to be

  2.
  followed by a further round of national protective measures in Europe, 
  the outlook for world trade will be very grim.

  The Prime Minister has also emphasised during this visit the concern 
  we have for the confusion which appears to have developed in the trading 
  relationship between Japan and the United States. This has aggravated 
  the situation to such ari extent that we now have the greatest threat 
  to world trade that we have seen in all the years since the War.
  The second economic issue concerns the European Economic Community. 
  The Prime Minister has again emphasised the extent to which certain
• Australian primary industries will be hit.

  Fortunately, in the last ten years, a great deal has been done to 
  diversify our trade. More is sold to the markets of the Pacific Basin 
  countries, particularly Japan, than ever before.
  But sometimes you find people charging the Government with having failed 
  to adequately prepare for Britain's entry into the E.E.C. What more 
  ought to have been done than pursue the development of other markets 
  as rapidly and as vigorously as possible, which is a continuing 
  Government objective?
  It would have been quite wrong, and would still be wrong, to assume
• that certain markets were going to be lost, and thus take steps to 
  phase out some rural industries in Australia. The years of debate 
  over the Common Market have not been wasted years. They have been 
  spent in obtaining alternative markets for much of our produce.
  This brings me to other issues which are all-important to our country. 
  Australia is helping point to the need for satisfactory relationships 
  between the United States, the Soviet Union, mainland China and Japan 
  which, eventually, will enhance the security of the smaller countries.
  We must make our voice heard at this time of changing Great-Power 
  relationships, for these changes are certain to impinge upon us.

  We are also adapting to these changes in a number of ways. The growing 
  depth of our relationship with Japan - our involvement in the Colombo 
  Plan, the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, and the Asian

      3.
      Development Bank are some examples.

      We have entered a regional defence arrangement with Britain, Malaysia, 
      New Zealand and Singapore. This arrangement underlines the significance
      of the changes taking place.
      The Prime Minister and President Nixon have emphasised again that the 
      ANZUS treaty remains the sheet-anchor of Pacific Security.

•     I have chosen in this talk to emphasise three aspects of the Prime 
      Minister's visit. I have done so because the issues themselves are 
      important and will significantly affect the pattern of Australia's 
      development during the next decade. The trade dispute between the 
      great free world countries...the attitudes of the enlarged Common 
      Market...arid the polital relationships between the United States, 
       China, Russia and Japan are all of real national interest and
       concern. to Australia.





•


       RECORDED: 1 1 .1 1 .1 971 .

