<!--start metadata-->
Title: Bass by-election, Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 8/06/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL TALK     For Sunday, 8 June 75 3HA
                   & Thursday, 12 June 75 3Y8
THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON, MR. MALCOLM FRASER

The economic stresses on the Government and the problems which 
the Labor Party has always had because of the divisions within 
its ranks came to a head in Canberra this week.

The Minister for Defence, Mr. Lance Barnard, who has served in 
Parliament for 21 years, and who was the Prime Minister's loyal 
deputy for seven years, has resigned from the Parliament.

His decision has caused both a Cabinet reshuffle in Canberra and 
a by-election in Tasmania.

The country now has its third Treasurer in seven months. Dr. Cairns 
is not even being allowed to bring down a budget in his own name.

Mr. Hayden, who forced the Medibank Scheme through Parliament 
against the protests of the medical profession and of the States 
is not to be allowed to launch it.

Mr. Cameron, who was Minister for Labour for 21 years has become, 
after publicised protestations, the Minister for Science.

The aim is to give the Government something of a new look as 
Parliament rises for the winter recess, and for the hard slog of 
budget preparation. But Mr. Whitlam has not succeeded in having 
new blood brought into his elected Cabinet, apart from one new man.

The changes are thus superficial - part of a progressive barn 
dance in which ministers and portfolios change partners while 
going around in circles.

There is no indication that the nation's fundamental economic 
problems are going to be overcome. These are unemployment and 
its cause, inflation.
                          ..2

                                                                     2.

 These are the problems that have driven the Government to the
 wall.  Is Mr. Hayden going to win the confidence of businessmen? 
 He has certainly not won the confidence of doctors!

 Mr. Cameron's pace-setters are already established policy. The 
 wages spiral which he initiated by pushing up salaries for public 
 servants beyond those of the rest of the community is still going.

 The Government sought to give public servants a superannuation 
 scheme with benefits which no other tax payer could hope to enjoy 
 and this legislation had to be amended by the Opposition in the 
 Senate.

 The Government has not grasped the taxation problem.  in fact,
 the Prime Minister calculated the systematic rip-off, which is
 what progressive taxation has become, into his campaign for office.
 "t would not be necessary to announce an increase in taxation to
 pay for the Government's schemes because inflation and rising wages
 would lift ordinary wage earners into higher and higher tax brackets.

 This is taxation by stealth.

Average weekly earnings which were $85 - $90 two years ago are now
 $150. Out of every extra dollar the tax payer pays out 50c.

Today it takes 40t to buy a loaf of bread and $3.50 to buy a pizza. 
What was once the price of a sit-down dinner in a cafe, has become 
the cost of fish and chips wrapped in paper.

Everyone expects to pay more tax as income rises.   But the amount
of extra tax which is attributable to the progressive nature of the 
tax scales alone is for the tax payer on $150 per week, now $500 
a year. This is where the deception lies.

This is what is financing the Government's extravagances and 
destroying incentive, stopping people from buying homes and 
turning a trip to the supermarket, into a time of anxiety.

It is these pressures which are weighing down the Government as 
they weigh down the family. And it is these pressures which 
explain the events in Canberra with resignations, reshuffles and 
open protests from Dr. Cairns at his replacement.
                                                                ••3

                              3.

Before the month is out the electors of Bass will have an 
opportunity on behalf of the rest of the country to pass judgment 
on the. Government.

Although it is a by-election, the issues before the voters., of Bass 
are the national ones of inflation, unemployment and governmental 
inefficiency and mismanagement.

