<!--start metadata-->
Title: Foreign affairs
Description: press statement
Date: 28/03/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


° PRESS STATEmENT
  MALCOLM FRASER :
                                                     March 28th, 1965

                   The main debate in this last week concerned foreign affairs. 
  Mr. Paul Hasluck, Minister for External Affairs, began the debate in a
  masterly review of the major power conflicts in the world. He then devoted 
  a considerable time to an analysis of the position in south-east Asia and 
  between Indonesia and Malaysia.
                   The news in recent weeks has clearly led to a deep concern 
  amongst all of us - a concern that the problems in south-east Asia may develop 
  into a much larger and wider war. Since this is a possibility it is important 
  therefore to know what the issues are, to know what is happening and why. 
  For a very long while North Vietnam and communist China have been directing, 
  re-enforcing and supplying the Viet Cong in South Vietnam. This is not just 
  a civil war. There are reported to be ten thousand members of the North 
  Vietnamese army operating with the Viet Gong in the South.
                   Until quite recently the United States and the-South 
  Vietnamese have been restrained in this matter. They have tried to contain 
  the guerilla movement from inside South Vietnam. However, the increasing aid 
  from North Vietnam has made it impossible to do this and therefore there have 
  been attacks by aeroplanes on targets in that country.
                   The attitude of the two sides at the moment is inflexible. 
  The United States rightly will not negotiate while North Vietnam and communist 
  China help the Viet Cong. The North Vietnamese and the Chinese say that they 
  won't negotiate unless all American forces and all American aid to the South 
  Vietnamese is withdrawn. This, of course, would mean that South Vietnam 
  would inevitably fall behind the communist curtain and it would not end the
  war because this is not a war that can be regarded in isolation. The 
  communist Chinese are now turning their attention to Thailand which has, for 
  some time, been peaceful and prosperous - a happy country, but communist 
  infiltration and activity on its northern borders is increasing. If South

                                                                      /2

                                  - 2 -
Vietnam falls the pressure will turn on Thailand then Peking would say - 
"we will negotiate about Thailand when all outside support is withdrawn". 
Next it would probably be Malaysia and where would it stop?
                 I am all for withdrawal from these areas so long as the 
withdrawal is realistic and so long as it is two sided. If the communist 
Chinese will remain at home and not subvert their neighbours then there would 
be no need for the Americans to be there or for our own country to have people 
in south-east Asia. However, to suggest that the West should withdraw and 
leave a vacuum which the communist Chinese would quickly fill is to advocate 
suicide. It would not only leave the country open to communist subversion 
but would destroy the confidence of independent countries around the world 
ih the ability of the West to prevent this kind of aggression. Three times 
over Berlin, Western Europe and the United States were resolute, three times 
the Russians knew that if they pressed their claims the West would use all 
the power at its command. The Russians learned the same lesson in Cuba and 
since these events the Russians have appeared more willing to co-exist with 
the West. The Chinese have not yet learned this lesson, their tactics are 
different. It is not the tactic of brute force so much as the tactic of 
subversion, to destroy the confidence of a people in their own Government by 
the use of terror and guerilla activities which will grow until the threatened 
country's army can be openly challenged. It is more like a slow disease 
which slowly grows but ultimately consumes the whole body.
                 For this reason it is more difficult to understand why a stand 
must be made at any one particular point of time, especially so since there 
have been many wars of subversion in recent years, and in all of them the 
terrorists have had safe havens of supply in another country. We will be 
cursed with this kind of war until the countries that practice subversion 
learn that their bases are no longer inviolate and immune to attack. South- 
east Asia is now moving to crisis point because the Americans have decided at
long last that this lesson must be taught. If there is to be peace in this 
part of the world subversion must be stopped and this will probably involve 
risks as large as those that were run in maintaining the freedom of Berlin 
or the safety of the United States over Cuba.
                                                                     /3

                 3
        The United States is prepared to run these risks because
She knows full well that the right of the people to live their own lives, 
the right of a country to be left unmolested is one that will only be 
maintained if countries concerned for peace are prepared to help each other. 
In this sense freedom and peace are not divisible.
        There could be two developments from this present
situation. If the North Vietnamese and communist China continue to help 
the Viet Cong movement in the south, if they move in more and more forces as 
a result of American raids, then a much larger war would seem inevitable. 
If North Vietnam and mainland China make a decision to stay behind their own 
boundaries, to let their neighbours alone, then negotiations which could lead 
to removal of all foreign troops from these areas could begin.
        All Australians will be waiting anxious to see what happens. 
Amongst ourselves we should know that Australia has made a conscious choice 
to help other countries in south—east Asia who want our help and to stand by 
those countries who believe in the same kind of things as we do. This is 
the only choice that we can make, and in making it we know that it could 
involve a heavy cost. At the same time, however, it provides the best 
guarantee of our own security. I think we all now recognise that we cannot 
in any sense stand apart from the main stream of events that are happening 
in south—east Asia, and that it is in our own interests to help other 
countries who wish to maintain their independence. Only by doing this can 
we have some assurance that we will get help if Australia herself should 
ever become subject to direct attack.

              __....__00o—_--_

