<!--start metadata-->
Title: Report on visit to Portland
Description: radio talk
Date: 25/11/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON
            reports on
          MINISTER'S VISIT TO 1OR2LAND.-"',E.4-1-

      Last week Senator the Hon. S.D. kaltridge, Minister for 
Shipping and Transport and newly appointed Minister for Civil Aviation 
visited the town of Portland at the invitation of Her Worship the 14iayor 
of Portland, Cr. Mabel Hedditch. His main purpose as Minister for 
Shipping was to look at the construction of the Portland Harbor to see 
what the shipping needs for the future are going to be.
      So far as I know, this is the first time a Federal Minister 
for Shipping has visited Portland and I believe this is a symbol of the 
growing development of this westrin corner of Victoria. This electorate 
is not just importantto Victoria - inthe future it is going to be important 
far more to Australia as a whole because I am quite convinced that
through time, by hard work and initiative, Portland will become the 
commercial and trading centre of western Victoria and south-easternSouth 
Australia and possibly part of New South 'ales, Because of this I have 
been trying ever since I was elected just on a year ago to get the
Federal Minister for Shipping to visit Portland to see what the prospects 
for the future are.
      In his own words he was not disappointed: I will quote 
his own report :-
      "I very much appreciate the opportunity I have had of seeing 
  Portland and being shown the quite dramatic plans for development which 
  are now being carried out. Mr. Malcolm Fraser requested me to visit 
  Portland soon aftr the House met early this year, and although 
  parliamentary commitments prevented me from making the trip earlier, 
  I have taken the first opportunity after the rising of the House to 
  comply with his request. I have not been disappointed. Phase 1 of 
  thPefdtevelopment is due for completion within the next two to three 
  years. Already it is obvious that wLen this phase is complete, there 
  will be at Portland a port capable of meeting the immediate needs of 
  the district. I have no doubt that the completion of this phase will 
  give additional stimulus to all those interested to press on with a 
  view to bringing the final plans to fruition. When that is done, there 
  will be a port which should be adequate for many years to come. One 
  of the most encouraging aspects of the ,,ork to date is that progress 
  is slightly ahead of the planned schedule.

                                                                                                                                                                       2w               w
                  N,                                The hinterland w.uich the port will serve is already sufficiently 
                               productive - indeed, sufficiently wealthy - to support the expansion 
                               plans envisaged, and if further development such as the establisbmeni 
                               of superphosphate works and other industries, follows, then there is 
                               no doubt that in a very little time a rppidly increasing amount of 
                               shipping will be required to meet the demand of the port. I hope 
                               that this hinterland extends to the port its maximum assistance and 
                               support, and that Portland will be increasingly used by all those 
                               producers - primary and secondary - who are located within the area 
                               which the port is capable of serving.
                                                    As Minister for Shipping I shall watch this development with
                               close interest.
                                                    During this visit I have had with me Mr. D.C.L. Williams, a 
                               Member of the Australian Coastal Shipping Commission, whomI invited 
                               to come so he would be familiar with the progress of development 
                               and with the needs of the port in respect of shipping.
                                                       I have been most favourably impressed by the energy, the industry 
                                  and drive displayed by the Harbor Trust Commissioners and those 
                                  officers who have been entrusted with the several aspects of port 
                               development. It is apparent that in a few years these gentlemen 
                               will have brought to fruition a plan which only a little while ago 
                                  was in the blue-print stage and which was regarded by many people 
                                  as being something of a "pipe-dream".
                                                       I shall be most interested to return to Portlanifrom time to 
                                  time to see the progress %hz which has been made."
                                                                                    Senator Paltridge left wanting to come back again. He was 
         impressed by the progress that has been made in Portland. He not only 
         toured the quarries, earth-works and the breakwater from dry land but he 
         went right round the main breakwater in the Harbor Master's launch.
         Also before he left T ortland he drove round to see where industrial 
         expansion is expected in the future and saw all the petrol installations 
         and :she newly completed Ampol storages and finally he bad a thorough look 
         over Borthwick Meat Works in action.
                                                                                       I would like to take this Opportunity of thanking him 
         publicly for having come to iortland. I hope his visit may be the first 
20/11/56.of many more both by himself anu by other Federal Ministers.

