<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government
Description: Broadcast
Date: 20/05/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                     Cr4,-*.-~
       49/ 4-/ VAP-0

                               Sunday, 20th May    3HA
RADIO BROADCAST                Wednesday, 23rd May 3LK
The Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.  Thursday, 24th May  3YB





There has been a good deal of talk in the last week about a 
double dissolution of Parliament. This is coming less than 
six months after Mr. Whitlam won his election. One would 
have thought that it would have been a thoroughly unpopular 
move to foist another election on the Australian people 
before the end of this year or early next year. However, 
I strongly believe that such moves are in the Prime 
Minister's mind. It may not be a double dissolution. 
Precedents have been set which would enable him to dissolve 
the House of Representatives at the same time as the
Senate election, and this would be a superficially popular 
move, because he could say that it was designed to decrease 
the number of elections held in Australia.

But his strategy runs much deeper than that. He wants to 
establish an electoral system that will guarantee him 
continual power. The Electoral Distribution Bill, which 
was defeated in the Senate, is one step in that process. 
If that Bill had become law, seats on the outskirts of 
Melbourne would have less voters than a seat like Wannon.

The second step in the process would be to add senators 
for the Northern Territory and the A.C.T., and this would 
enable him to add to the numbers of the members of the 
House of Representatives in city areas. I believe he wants 
to act quickly on these matters, and he wants to have the 
power to do it, which means he will want to coerce the 
Senate which at the moment is acting with a great deal of 
responsibility and self restraint.

The real problem for Mr. Whitlam, however, will be the 
problem of inflation which will hit farmers, all people 
on fixed incomes, everyone who is at the end of the line 
and who can't pass on increased costs. Mr. Whitlam is 
pretending that he is doing something about it with his 
Parliamentary Prices Committee and with the Prices 
Justification Tribunal that he wants to establish. These 
are cumbersome procedures and I don't believe they will 
achieve much.

A system that fixes prices but which leaves wages quite 
unrestrained is an unrealistic system. While there is 
an arbitration court, nobody can claim that that court 
establishes maximum wages. It establishes minimum wages, 
and there is an enormous number of examples of people paid 
much above the minimum. A system which really establishes 
a ceiling for prices, but places no restraint on wages, just 
won't work. Mr. Whitlam wants to give a show of doing 
something about it without, I believe, getting to the nub 
of the problem. He is not prepared to take the unpopular,


                                                 ...12

                     - 2 -





unpalatable Government measures that could control inflation, 
to argue for wages restraint as well as prices restraint, 
or to show restraint in new Government expenditure, not 
to stretch Australian resources too far. Indeed, rather 
than showing restraint, he has been using the Commonwealth 
Public Service as a pacesetter.for increasing wages and 
increasing holiday time.

So what is he going to do? He'll blame the States for not 
using the powers they have, for not using arbitrary and 
restrictive price controls, and therefore, when he comes 
to an election, he will also have a referendum seeking 
massive additional powers for the Commonwealth, saying 
that only if he has these powers can he control inflation. 
If this happens, there won't be much left of the States. 
It's part of a concerted move to establish total political 
authority in Canberra - a matter which I oppose completely 
and absolutely.

In my view, he'll want an election before he is forced to 
do something about inflation. He'll use the States as 
a scapegoat to couple a Senate election, House of 
Representatives election and a referendum all in one.
It's smart political strategy, but it's still an irresponsible 
political strategy, because there are many things that he 
could do to help restrain inflation within the Commonwealth's 
existing power.

