<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rest and recreation leave for soldiers serving in Vietnam
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 28/08/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                     9_,9sk








WEEKLY PRESS STATEMENT
Malcolm Fraser       28 August, 1967 
      REST AND RECREATION LEAVE FOR SOLDIERS 
         SERVING IN VIETNAM
    Further developments in the Rest and Recreation Programme 
have recently been announced in the Federal Parliament. R & R leave 
is the 5-days out-of-country leave given to all soldiers during their 
12 months tour of duty in Vietnam.
    Up to date the approved centres in which soldiers could take 
this leave have been in South East Asia, for example Bangkok, Hong Kong, 
Tokyo, Manila, Hawaii, and Singapore. Because of thé,increasing 
number of troops using these centres, and the consequent pressure 
being placed on facilities there, the Americans have been negotiating 
with our Government for some time to have Australia included in the 
choice of R & R Centres for their troops.
    Approval for this has now been given and Australian soldiers 
who choose to do so will also be able to come to Australia on their 
five days out-of-country leave. The Australians will come here on the 
planes chartered by the Americans for the transport of their own troops 
and they will come at the expense of the American Government. Initially 
the planes will come only to Sydney but eventually the Gold Coast will 
also be used as an R & R Centre.
    So that the Australian soldiers, no matter where they live in 
Australia, will have a minimum of four nights at home during their 
R & R leave period here, the Australian Government will pay internal 
air transport costs tó get them to and from their homes from the point 
of arrival in Australia, and travelling time will of course also be 
allowed where necessary for this purpose. Where this extra time in 
Australia means that the soldier misses the return flight on the 
American charter planes, which come in an out on strict 5-day schedules,. 
he will be returned to Vietnam by civil air services.

WEEKLY PRESS STATEMENT    28, August 1967
MALCOLM FRASER


        DEFENCE FORCES RETIREMENT BENEFITS PLAN


    The. Federal Government has recently announced extensions to the 
Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Plan. These will introduce benefits under 
the plan for short-term servicemen, Under present arrangement all soldiers 
are covered for war-caused injuries by Repatriation-benefits. Additional 
benefits for injuries or death caused during service in the Army are also 
available under the,DFRB fund which in the past has only been available to 
long-term servicemen, Benefits under this fund are .available no matter how 
injuries or death may be caused - during war, during duty in Australia or 
while on leave at home. In other words it is an insurance fund that covers 
contributors for injury, death, or, in the case of long-term servicemen, for a 
pension, The new arrangements will extend the provisions of this Fund to short- 
term servicemen, National Servicemen, three-year enlistees and CMF members on 
full-time duty for a 12 months term.

     These provisions are in addition to entitlements that a soldier might 
gain in Australia under the Commonwealth Employees' Compensation Act which, in 
effect, covers soldiers injured in the course of duty in Australia.

     The benefits under the DFRB Fund are in three categories.

1,   If a soldier serves his 20 years or more, he becomes eligible for a
pension and this has always been the long-term inducement for soldiers to serve 
on and make the Army or one of the other services their career.

2.   On the death of a serving soldier, whether from war causes or from 
accident or sickness in Australia, a pension (usually five-eights of the maximum 
pension that would have been payable for his rank) will be paid to the widow, 
The pension for the widow of an Australian private on this basis would be about 
$1,024 per year and for the widow of a sergeant about $1,307 per year. Payments 
in addition to these will be made for dependant children of widows. If the death 
is war-caused, the dependant would also get a repatriation pension in addition 
to this.

3.   In addition, there are benefits for soldiers who have been invalided 
out of the Army,

     The first of these provisions would not apply to a soldier on a two- 
year term, However, the extended scheme will allow these short-term servicemen 
to gain the other two benefits. For example, where a soldier suffers a

disability caused during his service in the Army and where this seriously 
impairs his capacity to wcrk, a pension will be paid to him while his civilian 
earning capacity is affected. An example of an extreme case in this category 
would be that of a married private short—term soldier who is permanently 
incapacitated as a result of war service. He will receive a pension of $31,50 
a week under this new provision, together with a basic tax—free $30.55 a week 
pension under Repatriation. If there are children there are additional repatria- 
tion benefits, of course, and for TPI pensioners all medical and hospital 
treatment is provided free of charge by the Repatriation Department.

    The Government made this decision about the DFRB payments in 
preference to the introduction of a special insurance scheme on the American 
lines for all soldiers. Such a scheme would only have benefited dependants 
of soldiers who actually died as a result of or during his service. In contrast, 
the DFRB scheme provides substantial benefits on a much wider basis.

    Legislation for the introduction of these extensions is at present 
being prepared and further detailswill be available when the Bill is 
introduced into the House of Representatives.

