<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters, Labor Opposition
Description: radio talk
Date: c1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Radio Talk.                L- )



Recently in Federal Parliament the Opposition raised, in the traditional 

manner, a motion directed towards criticism of theGovernment OM over 

the provision of adequate aged, invalid and widows' pensions and other 

social service benefits.
1
In reply, my colleague the Minister for social services, Mr. Wentworth,

pointer                           e l-       d 

how moitiOginn the social welfare pro.ram/had substantial y, improved as a 

result of Government de ision      i . - e t truths 
     'L
                     and did this ver.y effectively in a 

comparison of figures related to penSLon rates. First, NNW my colleague 

  i••• produced timpumummift pension rates for a widow with one child 

as they are today compared with whet they were when the ALP ware last 

in office (in 1949). Then, the widow with one child received 74.75 

a week, which today, allowing for price level changes, would be worth just 

snort of 711. How does that widow fare today? With one child, she

receives a basic pension of $14 ($3 more than the last 1.LP pension 

equivalent), and today IPu^* an top of that there are a range of additional 

benefits. For instance, she is paid in addition $2 supplementary assis- 

tance, $ 4 mother's allowance and Aimigjilw $2.50 a week for the child.

                 This adds up to a weekly total of $22.50--- 

jk more than twice the purchating power afforded by the tt bores Ay,

  which claims to stand as the traditional pomispent watchdogs of the 

welfare of the NM needy. But, then again, the $22.Ì50 did not tell the 

whole story because the widow is now entitled to medical services, and a 

number of other concessions, including assistance under the widow's 

training scheme, introduced by the Government in the last Budget. Nearly 

2000 widows have now applied for help under this vocational guidance 

scheme. y comparison of rates received by sidiemt the old age pensioner 

in 1749 and now also revealed an interesting picture. With his or her 

pension, lus the fringe benefits and medical services, the old age 

pensioner today recgeive~s nearly twice in terms of -urchasing power what

he   received under Labe. 4t My colleague pointed out that the Government

had raised the standards of social services KiA .A.

  "4"Igoiii over the years, and last budget saw an increase of $72 million 

under social welfare spending. He had, he said, no doubt that the next 

Budget would show the same kind of story.

I will not weary you with details of they Parliamentary debate, but 

a short summary of the Government's aims and record in this field will, 

I believe, hold more interest. The Commonwealth has been moving on a

broad, comprehensive front towards lifting the standards of welfare 

services. The Prime Minister has said that "no nation can be great unless 

it seeks not only materially to vim progress but also to take care of the

  2.
e                                                                 4444V2=t4.0
  weaker within it, the aged within it and the ill within it.0

  And the Government has acted. iamisimissimaiskomigat Operating now are schemes 

  announced in the last budget. No longer need those patients who insure 

  adequately with a hospital fund fear of the financial consequences of 

  long-term and chronic illness. He or she is now eligible for full

  hospital insurance benefits regardless of length of hospitalisation.

  Under the new benefit announced in the 1968 Budget, patients in nursing 

  homes needing more intensive car,&receive an extra 73-00 a day on top of. 

  the 72-00 ordinary benefit. gnd the Commonwealth entered a new field with 

  its decision to pay benefits for physically and mentally handicapped 

  children.                         on a matching basis
  On top on this the Commonwealth has pdt-T-5-The 'Ttates a comprehensive 

  program for the care of the aged. This is,..r-Three-prongegram 

  providing for senloTeItizen centres, home housekeeping services-r-miTT

  paramedi;aarvices such as„..,;k7Siotherap       n iiiiiirokammailio-gied persons' 

  owneMmes.

   naddiion the Commonwealth has offered 05.--m-i--1-11-=---over five. years for 

  theAs,velopment- of new nuraing-nié-S-Iri the Stites.

  These efforts cannot mossig be termed merell ,7oLitical propaganda. ihe
L 
  welfare achievements of the Gorton Government have alrdady brought 

  increased benefit to more than a million Australian residents. It will

  continue to look to the needs of the aged, the sick and the needy. 
                    7>
E The '8174PV5--A1,1straliats national service call-up systm was underlined 
  when President Nixon recently asked Congress to introduce a random 

  selection system for the military draft. The ballot system has,operated 

  successfully from the start of the Australian scheme
cLt
                      to increase the strength of the Regular Army to meet

  existing and foreseeable defence commitments at home and abroad? as well 

  as providing stronger citizen forces. The Australian system selects, 

  through the use of birthdates, the number to be considered for call-up. 

  More than 100,000 a year register under this system---far Aimmost beyond 

  the numbers mot needed to amilimmimilv serve--and the random selection

  system determines those who will actually go into the 1,rmy. The American
  attitude stemm       from the appointment of a Presidential Committee by 


  former President Johnson in February 1)67. This committee examined

  the suggestion that voluntary service could be sufficiently encouraged 
           comp]etely
  to eliminate/the need for national service call-up. m* However, it came up

  with the recommendatrion that the draft should be continued to provide the 

  nation with a flexible system of manpower procurement to meet national 

  security commitments under aliforeseeable circumstances. It also proposed 

  changes in the selection procedure to be based on the principle of random


  selection as adopted in Australia.

                                                   Despite criticism coming

                                          S-ct.,1-x-4a6 f

   from certain sources in fustralia, the Australian scheme has proved to 
   be completely fair,rmi equitable and impartial, and has resulted in 
   the'widest cross-section of the community being called up to serve. It is 
   not open to manipulation. And now the 24immelown United. States is moving 
   towards adoption of this method.
./The Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Doug Anthony, had some interesting 
   information for Parliament during the week. Mr. Anthony announced that 
   West Australian Government had advised the Commonwealth Government that it 
   would accept the Commonwealth's offer in relation to the marginal
   dairy farm reconstruction scheme. Ali-Under this scheme the Common- 
   wealth is prepared to make up to 725 million available over a four-year 
   period to help'people to voluntarily leave the industry and to assist 
   amalgamation of farms in an effort to diversify operations into beef or 
   other' pursuits. The Commonwealth's proposal was widely 'welcomed when
   it was proposed, irpseemeriPermsalikwirimpmòiiiimb y members of all partie!)
  The dairying. industry expressed support for the nrinciples of'the scheme, 
   although some felt that the scheme should go further than it will under 
   the present proposals. `the Minister told'Parliament that of the money used 
   by a State, half would be a non-repayable grant, and the remaining half 
   would be a'repayable loan with interest at the long-term bond rate
   at time of drawing. Mr.  r ?Pnthony recalled that in February this year 
   the Premier of NSW, Mr. Askin, wrote to the PrimeMinister on behalf of 
   all the states. The States did not reject the scheme, but mompit asked 
   that the Commonwealth should provide all the funds neededmodlimesimia 
   ,9üiOjer[x as well as costs of administration, ilmotiimirmomedimmidameiW 
   and made other suggestions which would have led to a situation in which
   the States would act entirely on behalf-of, and under the direction 
   of, the Commonwealth. But,-the-Minister pointed out, the States should 
   take part as active and responsible principals and not as passive agents. 
   The Commonwealth, he said, receftly advised the States that it holds to 
   the offer it made last September--and again asked each State for its 
   co-operation. Western ./ustralia had now accented that offer. No other
   State has.

