<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam
Description: radio talks
Date: 19/11/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                         1---- ~a~~-~~3                  C--        "WO_-~
~






                          MINISTER FOR THE ARMY








                              7ilz





                                                             ~~e/X, M. P.














  NAREEN,                                                                PARLIAMENT HOUSE
  VICTORIA                                                               CANBERRA, A.C.T.
  TEL. TARRAYOUKYAN 44                                                   TEL. 72867
                                                                               72868

RADIO SPEECH        3HA — 19 November 1967

MALCOLM FRASER      3YB — 23 November 1967


           VIETNAM.


    On a great number of occasions over the last two years I have
spoken about South East Asia and about Vietnam. I have done this not 
only because as Minister for the Army I have an administrative
responsibility for the Army-force in Vietnam, but also because I believe 
that in this decade no other matter is so important to the security of South 
East Asia and to Australia. So I hope you will forgive me if once again I 
state the reasons for the policy which has led to our close military involve- 
ment in South Vietnam.

    We are involved in South Vietnam in the broadest terms because we 
believe that unless there is security for all the small countries of South 
East Asia there will not be security for any of the countries of the region. 
Although the form of aggression has changed, South Vietnam is under aggression 
just as much as was Korea, or the countries of Europe and Asia in the last 
war. If aggression is allowed to succeed in this instance, it will spread. 
Already Communist insurgents trained in Vietnam are operating in parts of 
Thailand. When the Prime Minister of Laos was in Australia a short time ago 
he pointed out that Laos was in the vanguard of the fight for freedom in Asia, 
that his countryNas suffering gravely because there were 40,000 North 
Vietnamese troops there — this from a man who certainly does not belong to the 
Western World, who is a noted neutralist and a noted patriot. But his country 
is fighting for its life against North Vietnamese aggression. He would be 
among the first to admit that if the North Vietnamese won in Vietnam, the 
independence of Laos would be shortlived.

    Some people may say there are only about 3 million people in that 
country, but the rights of three million people are something to be closely 
guarded. If we do not stand in Vietnam at this time, where dove stand? In 
Thailand? In Malaya? In Singapore? or on Australia's own shores? If there 
is no opposition to the North Vietnamese regiments committed to the war in 
Vietnam, if westernsupport is withdrawn, does anyone think that any Asian 
country would ever abain place any faith in security arrangements that may 
be worked out with western countries? An Australian or US withdrawal from 
South Vietnam would be an unmistakable sign to Asian nations that they would 
have to be prepared to accept Chinese domination and that they would have 
to come to an accommodation with China. So far, the great majority of the 
countries of the region have indicated that this is not what they want.

•
                       2.


         Apart from the three western nations (America, New Zealand and 
     Australia) Thailand, the Philippines and Korea are all militarily involved 
     in Vietnam, supporting the South Vietnamese people against the north. I 
     have already indicated what Souvanna Phouma of Laos has said about North 
     Vietnam. Prince Sihanouk of neutralist Cambodia is also on record as saying 
     that for Cambodia, of all possible Communism, Vietnamese Communism is the 
     worst.

         In recent days, Lee Kuan Yew, the Socialist Prime Minister of
     Singapore, has let it be known that his one concern about US involvement in 
     Vietnam is that the people of the United States should have thecbtermination 
     and patience to see through a long drawn out and bitter struggle, in which the 
     extremes of hasty and dangerous excalation or complete withdrawal need to be 
     avoided.

         Taiwan, of course, supports South Vietnam. Whilst under Soekarno,
     the Indonesians would have supported China and North Vietnam. It should be
     noted that recently diplomatic relations between Indonesia and China have
     been suspended because of alleged interference in Indonesian internal affairs
     by Chinese diplomats. While Japan has not siad very much about the struggle
     her Foreign Minister recently indicated, in relation to the bombing, that any
     move to end it should be viewed against the possibility of reciprocal moves
     from North Vietnam itself. Malaysia has given substantial assistance to the
     South Vietnamese and they support the right of South Vietnam to s'1..f-determination.
     It should be remembered that for 12 years, from 1948 to 1960, while still a
     British protectorate, Malaysia suffered from a Communist terrorist campaign
     which threatened the security of that country.

         It is certainly possible to find people around the world who oppose 
     what the Unitéd States and Australia are doing but it is difficult to find such 
     people, with the possible exception of Cambodia, in South East Asia itself. 
     Whose opinion would you sooner accept - that of somebody who might live in 
     Europe, or of somebody who lives on the edge of China and has to cope with 
     the problem of China?

         If we withdraw, as we would be committed to do under Labor Party 
     policy, the voices raised against US commitment in the United States itself 
     would be greatly strengthened. If we who live on the Edge of South East Asia 
     are not concerned with these matters, they would argue, why should the United 
     States, living on the other side of the Pacific, be concerned. The United 
     States takes no pleasure or profit from its commitment in Vietnam and they 
     are involved for the same basis reason that we are - because they believe it 
     is important for small nations to be able to work out their own future in 
    Freedom and without fear.

               3.


    The opposing forces have never ceased in their campaign to undermine 
the will and resolution, especially of the United States but also of the 
people of Australia. They know they cannot win militarily, but they could win 
if we became tired, if the United States became tired, and withdrew support. 
Thus they conduct their campaign, to confuse the issues in this war, to 
establish a moral doubt about the justice of our cause.

    The campaign against the bombing of the North is a part of this 
broader campaign. Since it is specifically directed against military targets 
in North Vietnam, it hurts North Vietnam; it involves a half million or more 
people in repairing the supply routes and keeping them open, and it makes the 
North Vietnamese effort much harder than it might otherwise be. They want 
the bombing stopped, so therefore they instigate a campaign designed to force 
the United States, by the strength of world opinion, to give up this military 
tactic wïile the North Vietnamese would continue their aggression without 
making any reciprocal gesture. If there were any sign, any suggestion, that 
the North would come to a negotiation then the position would be different 
but no such sign has yet been given, no such gesture has yet been made.

   Whenever there have been pauses in the past in the bombing, they have 
been used to re-equip and resupply the armies in the South, to equip them with 
more modern weapons, to enable them to inflict heavier casualties on the forces 
of the Free World. On my last visit to Vietnam, marine forces in the Northern 
part of South Vietnam gave me what I regard as conclusive evidence that this 
is so Do people expect the Americans, the Australians, the South Vietnamese 
themselves, to accept heavier casualties as a result of abandoning this 
particular tactic? George Brown, the Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom, 
recently said: "But with no indication from the other side as to what might 
or might not flow from a decision to stop the bombing, the cost has to be 
counted in terms of Vietnamese, American and, let us not forget, Australian 
and New Zealand lives - and of continued conflict in South Vietnam, as well 
as in terms of the possibility of an assured peace." If there were some 
possibility of an assured peace it would be the easiest thing in the world. 
for the North Vietnamese to give an indication that this would be so.

   This is the very time when we need to re-affirm our steadfast support 
for. South Vietnam because the policies of that country, and of the Free World 
Forces, are now beginning to bite - larger and larger areas are becoming 
secure; civil reconstruction and development is beginning in anever greater 
number of villages and hamlets; five elections have been held in the course 
of 12 months; local elected village councils, an elected President, Senate 
and Lower House have all been established. In all but one of these elections 
more than 80% of the people on the rolls voted, a very significant part of the 
total population. If they had wanted to support the North Vietnamese and the

•

                     4.


      Viet Cong, they could very easily have stayed away from the polling booths 
      because this is what the Viet Cong asked, indeed demanded. They committed 
      many acts of terror preceding and during the elections to try and enforce their 
      demands. Despite this there was a massive turnout of voters. The people 
      were determined to take advantage of the opportunity being given to them to 
      establish representative Government.
         The South Vietnamese forces too are improving in quality and stamina, 
      and for a considerable time now many of their units have been fighting very 
      gallantly and very hard. One of the most unjust accusations that can be made 
      is that the Vietnamese are not fighting sufficiently hard on their own account.

         I repeat that I have formed these views, not only after an analysis 
      of information coming to Australia from many sources, but also after three 
      visits to South Vietnam and after a close questioning of many people, 
      including a large number of Australians who have seen much of this tragic 
      country at first hand.

         If in this Senate election there is a substantial swing away from the 
      Government towards the Labor Party, this will be a sign of encouragement to 
      the North Vietnamese — it will be a sign of weakening determination. It would 
      encourage them to grit their teeth for a longer period. The one thing that 
      will shorten this war more than anything else is a demonstration of complete 
      determination that we shall not give up, that the South will not be deserted.

         The people of San Francisco have just voted by an overwhelming 2-1 
      majority in support of continuation of the United States commitment in Vietnam. 
      I hope Australia will also indicate her determination on the 25th, because no 
      matter what anyone might say, no matter what we might think of our domestic 
      circumstances, no policy is more important to our future. If South East Asia 
      is to be left open to Communist aggression what would we think of the future 
      for our own people and our own children?

