<!--start metadata-->
Title: Vietnam Civic Action - the other war
Description: press statement
Date: 13/04/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


#                                              `~~- ,   i 3 . 4.. (3 .1, `4.
                                                     ^       Q. S_L,‘3
                         VIET NAM CIVIC ACTION —    or.) 17,
                             THE OTHER WAR
          PRESS STATEMENT                         13 April, 1967
          MALCOLM FRASER

                    The contribution of the Australian Force in 
          Viet Nam cannot be measured by military operations alone. 
          The other war — the fight against ignorance, sickness and 
          poverty — is as real as the casualties on the battlefield.

                    The practical assistance being given by troops 
          to enable the Vietnamese people to improve their standard 
          of living in a peaceful way, secure from fear of intimidation, 
          may ultimately be the measure of the success of the Australian 
          commitment.

                    Not enough is known in Australia of this important
          aspect of the activities of the Australian troops in Viet Nam.

                    Civic Action is a vital factor in the pacification 
          process following the securing of an area by combat troops.

                    It is a planned operation that goes far beyond 
          voluntary humanitarian or philanthropic acts.

                    Civic.Action is a continuing responsibility — much
          has already been achieved — but much more remains to be done.

                    It began with 1 RAR in 1965 and has been enlarged greatly 
          since the arrival of the Task Force in June 1966.

                    To date there have been only two officers and three 
          warrant officers who are engaged full time in organizing and 
          supervising military Civic Action. They have been assisted by 
          military personnel on a part time basis and a first rate job has 
          been done.

            2.


     Some examples of works successfully completed 
by the Australian. Force includes:
     a. A market place constructed at Hoa Long. 
     A project selected by the village population 
     of 7,000.
     b. A dispensary built in the poorer part 
     of Vung Tau; constructed, fully equipped 
     and attended daily by Australian medical 
     personnel.
     c. Vung Tau Junior Boys' Military Academy — 
     provided water storage and reticulation, built 
     and fitted out library, converted stables into 
     eight classrooms.
     d. Built a community centre at Nam Binh 
     Refugee Settlement, including a sewing room 
     for village women plus moms where Army doctors 
     and dentists could give treatment.

     Australian units have taken part in many other civic 
action projects, some initiated by the Vietnamese and others by 
American teams.

     These include malaria control, construction and 
repair of village schools, provision of play grounds, school 
supplies and classes in English; soil erosion and drainage 
projects, construction of resettlement villages for refugees, 
and provision of food and clothing to orphans, refugees and other 
destitute people.

     All civic aid activities undertaken by the Force 
involve the spending of money. For the financial year 1966/67

            3.


the Federal. Government has allotted over $100,000 to the Army 
for use in Civic Action work. In addition, the Australian 
Force has access to material and funds supplied by the US 
Government for approved projects. To this must be added the 
value of the troops' labour and voluntary assistance by 
Vietnamese villagers, which is not charged against the 
projects.

     The Army is not carrying this responsibility 
alone. It has been greatly assistedby voluntary organizations 
in Australia and the United States.

     The principal Australian groups and their 
achievements are:
     a. R.S.L. "Operation New Life" has collected 
     almost 50 tons of household items, garden tools, 
     sewing machines, clothing and many other
     articles which have been used in the rehabilita- 
     tion of refugees in the Australian area of 
     responsibility.
     b. Australian—Vietnamese Civil Action Project 
     (A.V.C.A.P.), Formed in Queensland, this group 
     has collected some $4,000 to be used mainly on 
     educational projects.
     c. Defend Australia Committee. Raised in Victoria 
     and South Australia, it has donated $1,275 to pay 
     fcnr improvements to the Vung Tau Junior Boys's 
     Military Academy. The committee also has collected 
     a number of articles which the Army has distributed 
     in Viet Nam, including bicycles, playground equip- 
     ment and school supplies,

            4.


     Recognizing the need of the people and having 
the staff to fulfil an aid programme has been a continuing 
problem.

     The limited number of Army personnel available 
on full and part time duty to ascertain needs and develop 
practical projects has necessarily restricted the scope of 
Civic Action.

NEW PROPOSALS

     Because of the importance the Government places
on this aspect of our operations in Viet Nam, it has been
decided to include a special Civil Affairs Unit in the 900 men bein
being added to the Force this year. The Unit will have a
strength of ten officers and thirty—six other ranks and will
be commanded by a lieutenant—colonel.

     This unit will be responsible for the planning, 
coordination and supervision of all military civic action by 
the Australian Force.

     It will include appropriate specialists in the 
fields of construction, health and education.

     After initial preparation it is expected that the 
unit will be ready for deployment in Viet Nam in June this year.

     Civic Action remains the responsibility of the entire 
Australian Force; the Civil Affairs Unit will enable many more 
projects over a wider field to be undertaken and will also 
permit of the maximum use being made of funs and materials

•
                  5.


       being provided by the Government and volunteer groups in 
       Australia.

            The work of the new unit will in no way inhibit 
       the way in which many individual soldiers and units are 
       personally helping the Vietnamese people in a variety of 
       ways in small projects of their own.

            Major P.R. Gower of Army Headquarters, who has 
       been closely associated with this aspect. ui military activity, 
       will be visiting Viet Nam next month to see at first hand 
       work already done and to seek ideas which may influence military 
       Civic Action in the future.

