<!--start metadata-->
Title: Visit to Papua New Guinea
Description: radio talks
Date: 5/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


0         Sent to Newspapers ; Freeth; White; Lehmann & McKellar    D.J.O.
              PRESS STATEMENT
              The Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.                      5 May, 1967

                          Visit to Papua-New Guinea
                     I have just come back from eight days in Papua- 
              New Guinea. The main reason for my visit, of course, 
              was to have a look at the Army build-up in the Terri- 
              tories and to see for myself the bearing and standard 
              of the Pacific Island soldiers. Quite apart from this, 
              however, it was an exciting week.

                     It was the first time I have been to the Territories 
              and much of what I saw was unexpected. For example, I 
              think most of us in thinking of New Guinea bring to mind 
              heat and humidity and tropical jungle. But our first 
              night was spent in the Highlands at Goroka. Here the 
              climate is perhaps one of the best in the world. The 
              days are warm but not hot, it rains nearly every night 
              and the evenings are cool enough for blankets. At least, 
              this is what the local .District Commissioner told me would 
              happen and it did.

                     I also met one of the pioneers of this region, Mr. 
              Jim Leahy, the first white man to prospect over the 
              Highlands in the 1930's looking for gold. After the 
              war he came back and established himself as a coffee 
              and tea planter. He has experimented in many other 
              things and has demonstrated that first class pastures 
              can be grown in these areas and that cattle and horses 
              do very well with little attention.

                     He had an interesting story to tell about his 
              return after the war. He wanted to get the highlanders 
              to work. They would work for knives or tomahawks, or

                                                                           /2

        -2-

for shells which were their own form of currency, 
but he only had pound notes and they were not 
interested in those. He thought he would educate 
them to work for money so he collected two plane- 
loads of knives and tomahawks and set up a shop 
near the airstrip. He was soon sold out. He came 
back with more some days later but by this time one 
or two of the highlanders' had begun to learn what it
was all about. During the night one thousand high- 
landers wanting to buy knives and tomahawks collected 
outside the shop but one, more astute than the others, 
had got his friends and relatives into the front of the 
queue. They came in and bought knives and tomahawks 
for about 10/- each and as soon as Jim Leahy had sold 
out the highlander opened up his own shop in front of 
the store. By this time he was selling the goods for 
£2 each.
  A lot has happened since then. Coffee is quite 
widely planted and the highland coffee is some of the 
best in the world. On a brief view, I would think that 
there will be a considerable future for a cattle industry, 
too, in that area.
  Our time at Goroka was all too short but from 
there we went to Vanimo, which is an outpost on the 
north west of Papua-New Guinea and the nearest military 
post to the West Irian border. Here, a year before, 
one of the young Lieutenants in the Army on a 30 day 
patrol in the very rough country to the south, had 
come across a tribe who had never before been detected
                   ••••/3

                  -3-

by police or army patrols. He was the first 
white man to be seen by the tribe.
     Anzac Day was spent at JJewak and except for 
the main centres in Australia I doubt if more 
énthusiasm or more interest could be shown anywhere. 
I was told that this was the normal thing for uiewak. 
There were possibly 5,000 people at the ceremony and 
after the service, I spoke to Australian and Pacific 
Island ex-servicemen, many of whom were wearing 
wartime medals. They were obviously immensely proud 
of the service they had performed in support of our 
own forces.
     JVewak is one of the centres where a large new 
army establishment is being built. The expansion 
programme announced for the Australian Army in 1964 
was paralleled by an expansion of the Pacific Island 
Regiment from a one to a 3 battalion force. The 
construction of the new barracks buildings at the five 
centres - Wewak, Lae, and in Port Moresby at Murray 
Barracks, Taurama and Goldie River - is very much the 
same as the construction being used for the new 
Australian Army barracks at Townsville. The standards 
for the buildings are the same and there are only minor 
differences in the internal areas. In all, the Common- 
wealth will be spending about $33 million on the new 
construction in the Territories and this should be 
completed by 1968. It will be a permanent and lasting 
asset to the Pacific Island Regiment.
     During the visit I opened the new Training Depot 
at Goldie River, not far from Port Moresby, and it was 
interesting to compare the old construction with the 
new buildings. The Pacific Islanders call their local
building materials "sak sak", and they consist mostly /4

        -4-

of timber and palm leaves. They are quite well 
adapted to the conditions of the Territories but the 
maintenance, as you can imagine, is extraordinarily 
high. The units should be able to operate much more 
effectively out of the new quarters.
  I found the standards of training and performance
of the Pacific Island Regiment to be very high and
members of the force had an obvious pride in the Service.
I attempted to point out wherever possible that the
development of the Pacific Island Regiment is not
basically an extension of the Australian Army. We are
developing a viable force which will be able to play
its proper part in the development of Papua - New Guinea
and it will be an Army for the defence of these territories.
Over recent years we have been speeding up the training
of the Pacific Island officers and non-commissioned
officers because when the time comes for independence
the Army must be in a position to stand on its own feet
and be responsible to the political power. In these
circumstances, of course, if they wanted continued
support from the Australian Army I am quite certain
that this would be forthcoming, but I would imagine
that this would be a decision that the people in the
Territories would make themselves.
  There are two other points that I would like to 
mention. The Army has a very extensive education 
programme for recruits and this is continued after 
the soldiers move to battalions, There is an emphasis 
on teaching the soldiers to speak English fluently 
and well and also in stimulating a sense of civic 
responsibility and national pride. This education 
programme is of great importance because the Army is
                     /5

         -5-

one of the principal unifying factors in the
Territories. They have 700 languages and 2000
dialects and very often the people from one tribe 
never meet those from another. The Army quite 
deliberately recruits from all over the Territories 
and thus, people from different tribes live and work 
together and learn to have a sense of unity. Thus, 
together with the Administration and the Police, the 
Army is one of the main forces for unification and the 
development of a national identity.
   There are quite a number of National Service 
teachers serving in the Territories and with their 
training as teachers they are of tremendous benefit 
in the education programme that is being pursued. 
Indeed, without these National Service teachers I 
doubt that the Army would have been able to muster 
the skills that are necessary for the programme.
   Luring the normal course of training Army patrols 
go into some of the most rugged and difficult country 
and make contact with people who are in the most isolated 
areas of the Territories. The Army will, in future, be 
doing what it can to help these people in small acts of 
community aid. We will manage this in this way - when 
patrols are going into a certain area the Army will make 
this known to the local District Commissioner and will 
ask local Administration officials if there are any 
particular community aid tasks that they might be able 
to undertake during the course of the patrols. This 
will always be done with the prior agreement of the 
Administration but it will help I believe to give some
                      /6

4 •             -6-

        additional services in a small way, especially to 
        those in the remoter parts of the country, and it 
        will also help the Pacific Islanders to understand 
        that the pacific Islands Regiment is their Army for 
        their help and protection.
          There is only one other thing that I would like 
        to mention. It was in Wewak of course that Edward 
        Kenna won his V.C. for his magnificent service in 
        the Australian Army and I found that his name was well 
        remembered by many of the people up there. I was also 
        shown the areas where his acts of bravery were performed. 
        It was nice to know such heroism is well remembered.

