<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Debate
Description: press statement
Date: 15/11/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT                                      November 15th, 1959
MALCOLM FRASER 
                The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association's Conference 
ended last Saturday. A great part of the discussions concerned the 
joint problems of economic co—operation within the Commonwealth and the 
difficulties of development in the underdeveloped countries.
                The Australian Treasurer, Mr. Holt, opened the debate on 
economic co—operation within the Commonwealth by outlining the capital 
resources that were available throughout the world and by saying how 
extremely heavy were the demands on these relatively limited resources. 
The whole world is crying out for expansion and development; even
countries that are highly developed like the United Kingdom find themselves 
forced to spend vast sums of money on the development of new processes and
the expansion of atomic power for peaceful purposes.  This, of course, 
tends to lessen the funds that may be available for investment in other 
countries. Australia itself, which is pursuing vigorous developmental 
programs, would probably be able to do more at any given time if greater 
capital resources were available to us on a permanent and assured basis. 
However, even though there are limits to what can be done, notable progress 
can and has been made within the Commonwealth countries.
                A suggestion was made during the debate for a Commonwealth 
Development Bank; a Bank to which all members would subscribe in proportion 
to their own resources and which would then make loans available to the
under—developed members of the Commonwealth.  This is a sound idea and one 
that is worthy of support. It was originally put forward two or three years 
ago. However, this idea may not come to fruition because the United States 
has sponsored the formation of what will be called an International Develop- 
ment Association. This would have the same functions and purposes as the 
proposed Commonwealth Development Bank, but it would not be restricted to
members of the Commonwealth.   If the international organisation can be 
brought into being it would probably be unwise for the Commonwealth to 
pursue its own plans.
                This is an example of how the Commonwealth can give a lead 
to all the countries of the world because I think it quite probable that the
International Development Association would never have been suggested and 
would not come to fruition if the Commonwealth had not, at an earlier stage,
-suggested the Commonwealth Development Bank.

                                         2
                Members of the Commonwealth from some African and Asian 
countries drew the attention of the Conference to the difficulties that can 
be caused when policies in one country do damage to another within the 
Commonwealth.    I can give an example of this in this way. We, in 
Australia, are trying to build up our own strength, and as far as possible
we wish to make ourselves self-sufficient.     If, in doing this, we find 
that we are producing things which we used to import from other Commonwealth 
countries, then we may do grave damage to those countries. This is
important because many cf these countries live almost entirely on the export
of one, two or three commodities.    It may be rubber and tin, as in the 
case of Malaya; it may be tea,cocoa or copra as in the case of other
countries within the Commonwealth.    If we, and other more advanced 
countries, make ourselves self-sufficient in some of these tropical and 
semi- tropical products, then the damage to these other smaller countries 
of the Commonwealth can be great. This is a problem which obviously 
must be watched in relation to the development of any individual member 
of the Commonwealth, and I would say quite categorically that the stronger 
members of the Commonwealth have an obligation in this matter to the less 
developed countries.
                In the question of economic co-operation and development, 
I only want to quote one more fact to drive home the difficulty that many
countries are facing.    India is a country with a rapidly increasing
population, confronted by immense difficulties and great poverty.    She 
is making many sacrifices to build up the basic development of the country. 
You will realise how difficult is her task when I say that her national 
income is twice that of Australia, but her population is forty times as great
                During these debates, which were all held in the House of 
Representatives, we had the unusual and rare spectacle of the Australian 
Prime Minister being followed by an ex-Prime Minister of Great Britain, 
Earl Attlee, then being followed by the leader of the Opposition, Dr. Evatt - 
all from the same side of the House.
                 In its final stages the Conference carried a decision to
hold its meetings each year instead of every second year.    This is a sound 
step and one which can be regarded as a measure of the benefit and value 
which all those that participated placed in this Conference. It is quite
certain that all the delegates to this country left Australia with a

                 3

better understanding and regard for our own problems, difficulties 
and policies, and we, in return, have been given some conception of 
the immense difficulties confronting other members of the Commonwealth. 
As the Conference will be held in future years in other Commonwealth 
countries so will our understanding and knowledge of these problems 
increase.

