<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Wool Commission, child care centres, emergency relief for woolgrowers, defence talks in New Zealand
Description: Radio talk
Date: 22/11/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 RADIO TALK                    Sunday, 22 November, 1970 — 3HA
                               Thursday, 26 November, 1970 — 3YB

      This week I would like to talk with you about the Australian
Wool Commission's first week of operations....the Government's proposal
for Child Care Centres the emergency relief fund for woolgrowers
and defence talks in New Zealand.
     The results of the Australian Wool Commission's first week of 
operations throughout Australia have been heartening.
     The Department of Primary Industry said that at the end of the week
prices for wool at all centres showed an average increase of just 
under five per cent.
     The market on the final day of the Melbourne wool sales closed
at the highest point of the series wit.h97% of the offering being 
cleared to the trade.
     The Melbourne catalogue represented all Victorian districts
supplemented by consignments from the Riverin a and the south—east 
of South Australia.
     Main buyers were Japan and Western and Eastern Europe, followed
by Britain with Australian mills and processors providing support on 
selected types.
     Throughout Australia there was a greater air of confidence in the
market in the sellers' favour with the Wool Commission operating at all 
major sales.
     While obviously I cannot claim that the improved selling 
situation is completely the result of the Commission's activities I am
sure that it has played a role in assisting the upward trend 
of market prices.
     It should be kept in mind by all woolgrowers that if
market improvement and stability is to be continued, the Commission 
will continue to need the fullest support of the grower.
     The Commission must continue to work successfully in an 
effort to help strengthen the auction system and provide needed 
improvements in the administration of the Australian wool clip.

             — 2
  Another step in the Wool Commission's operations would be 
towards the preparation,handling and marketing of wool — an 
area where there has been less progress than with any other 
commodity in Australia.
   A more dynamic approach to wool marketing is needed and 
I hope that the Commission will be :able to tackle this problem 
in an energetic way.
   For example,if trails being financed by the Government 
were successful the industry could move into sale by core 
sample on a big scale.
   Sale by sample would cut the amount of handling of bales 
of wool which could be taken straight to a port facility.
   The Wool Commission has the power to co—ordinate the 
introduction of such marketing measures.
   This could lead to modernisation of many of the existing 
metha of handling and selling wool.
   A united front by the wool industry is vital to ensure 
continued success for the Commission and future prosperity 
of the industry.
   I would like to stress the significance of the Government's 
proposal for a scheme to assist in the establishment and 
operation of child care centres.
   One of the greatest changes that has taker place in the 
Australian workforce in recent years has been the increasing 
number of married women in the workforce.
   In the last decade the proportión` of married women 
working has doubled from 9 to 18%.
   The availability of adequate child care facilities for 
the children of working mothers is of real importance.
                         ...13

               3 -
   At present, the majority of working mothers have to 
arrange for their children to be looked after by relatives, 
friends and neighbours, or by other means which are often of 
a temporary nature.
   A survey by the Bureau of Census and Statistics shows that 
many working mothers would prefer to place their children in 
child care centres if they were available.
   There may be differences of opinion in the community on 
whether, and under what circumstances, mothers with young 
children should work.
   The fact is that many mothers are choosing to work and 
there is an increasing tendency from them to do so.
   Therefore, it is essential to ensure their children 
should receive the care and attention that will foster their 
fullest potential.
   Because of this need the Prime Minister has announced 
that the Government will give high priority to the establishment 
of child care centres for children of pre-school age or for 
children of working - or sick- mothers.
   This development will need to ensure that mothers who 
choose to work may do so free from worry about the quality of 
care their children will receive .
   It is intended that there will be consultations with those 
organisations concerned to work out guidelines and standards 
covering the nature of the accommodation and equipment needed, 
staffing needs and the training of staff for child care centres.
   The proposed scheme represents an important advance in 
social policy which will be of considerable help to working 
mothers, their young children, employers and the community at 
large.
   Wool growers eligible for grants from the $30 million 
emergency relief fund established by the Government are urged 
to apply now as the closing date for applications is November 
30th.

                4
   Only 12,000 applications have been received, although 
it is estimated that between 25,000 and 30,000 growers are 
eligible.
   About 80% of the growers who have applied for grants have 
been found eligible, and so far about 4,000 cheques have been 
posted.
   About one-third of these cheques were for the maximum 
grant of $1,500.
   The remainder are for interim payments, and the growers 
receiving these cheques will get a final payment when all 
applications have been dealt with.
   I remind you tat the scheme is based on a decline in 
wool income between the financial years 1968-69 and 1969-70.
   If a grower feels that his 1968-69 wool income, because 
of drought, is not a fair basis for comparison with his 1969-70 
income, he should submit information on earlier years, and 
this would be taken into account.
   Any grower who believes he is eligible for assistance 
should apply, explaining any special circumstances.

   I shall be in New Zealand until the end of the week and 
am scheduled to return to Australia on Friday, November 27.
   If any of you have any problems that I can assist solve, 
my personal staff in Canberra will take note and refer them 
to me immediately on my return to Australia.
   The purpose of my visit is to have talks with the
New Aealand Ministers of Industries and Commerce and of Defence, 
in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding on Co- 
operation in Defence Supply between Australia and New Zealand.

               — 5
   The talks are the first formal discussions between 
Ministers to review the progress achieved towards long term 
objectives in defence supply cooperation since the Memorandum 
was signed in September last year.
   The development of all facets of cooperation in defence 
supply between Australia and New Zealand is essential and will 
contribute materially to the logistics support of their armed 
forces,as well as strengthening the capability of the 
Australian/New Zealand defence supply area.

