<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr Wentworth suspended from the House, implementation of government policy
Description: press statement
Date: 15/03/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                    3


           PRESS STATEMENT:

           MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                March 15th, 1964


                           MR. WENTWORTH SUSPENDED FROM THE HOUSE.

                           Last week the Parliament experienced its first stormy 
           and difficult moments.

                           Mr. W. C. Wentworth, who is always controversial and 
           often interesting, had risen in support of another member on the adjourn- 
           ment. Mr. Wentworth stung the Leader of the Opposition, Arthur Calwell, 
           to reply. Mr. Calwell spent most of his time talking about the family 
           of Bill Wentworth and talked about an earlier William Charles Wentworth, 
           who was a leading figure in the New South Wales Parliament something like 
           100 years ago.

                           A group of people, of whom the earlier William Charles 
           Wentworth was one, had tried to buy all the South Island of New Zealand, 
           and the then Government of New South Wales introduced legislation into 
           the New South Wales Parliament to prevent this. This was round about 
           1840. It is reported that Mr. Wentworth the first had bought all the 
           South Island and 200,000 acres in the North Island for £400 and some 
•          small gifts to the Maori Chiefs. The sale worked out at something like
           400 acres for a penny. This land sale did not go through. It was, of 
           course, frustrated by the New South Wales Government as anyone would 
           expect. What it has to do with the present William Charles Wentworth
           is a little difficult to understand. If we were all blamed for the 
           alleged sins of our ancestors there's probably no saying where we would
           end up.       Calwell's remarks were additionally unfortunate because 
           they besmirched the memory of a great pioneer Australian who was one of 
           the most powerful fighters for democracy in the then colony.

                           Mr. Calwell ended his speech by saying - "They just rake 
           it over all the time, hoping as Hitler hoped that if you tell a lie often 
           enough and make it big enough somebody will believe it. " The 
           implication in this was obvious, and Mr. Wentworth, as was his right, rose 
           and asked for the withdrawal of the word "lie". This is one of the words 
           that you aren't meant to use although it is quite Parliamentary to say 
           "the honourable member is a fibber" or "treats the truth roughly" or 
           something of this kind.
•                          The difficulty arose because as soon as Mr. Wentworth, 
           in accordance with his right, asked for the withdrawal of the word, the 
           Opposition made such an outcry that the Speaker was not able to hear what 
           Mr. Wentworth was saying. He therefore tried to get Mr. Wentworth to 
           resume his seat so that he could bring the whole House to order and then 
           hear what Mr. Wentworth wanted to say. The Speaker was in a difficult 
           position, and he asked - indeed ordered - Mr. Wentworth to resume his seat. 
           Unfortunately, Bill Wentworth I think misunderstood the Speaker's motives 
           and thought that he was not being given an opportunity to take his point 
           of order and, therefore, he kept bobbing up and down at the same time as 
           the Speaker was on his feet. He was warned once and then he was named 
           because he was not conforming with the instructions from the Chair.

                           When a member is named the Minister in Charge of the 
           House, in accordance with Standing Orders, must move that the honourable 
           member who has been named be suspended from the service of the House.

                           It was most unfortunate that all this happened, because 
           although Mr. Wentworth was technically wrong it was the outcry from the 
           Opposition (which prevented him or the Speaker from being properly heard) 
           that led to the misunderstanding.


                                                                           /2

                                             2 -

                           Anyway, Mr. Alan Hulme, the Minister in Charge of the 
           House, moved Mr. Wentworth's suspension. Government members are all 
           committed in these circumstances to support the Minister who has moved
           the motion.  The Opposition were, of course, jubilant, and they all 
           came crowding over on to the Government benches, all of them to assist 
           in removing Mir. Wentworth from the House for twentyfour hours.

                           After the vote some semblance of justice was done 
           because the Speaker then asked the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw 
           the remark that he made in relation to the member for Mackellar - that's
           Mr. Wentworth.  Mr. Calwell rose and did so.

                           It was an interesting and stormy quarter of an hour, and 
           it demonstrated once again how it is impossible to predict the course of 
           what will happen in the Parliament. A chance remark or an inflammatory 
           or provocative speech can sometimes bring a quiet and peaceful House to a 
           state of uproar. It is fortunate that this doesn't happen very often or 
           the reputation of the Parliament would suffer.

           Implementation of Government policy:

                           In the weeks since the last election the Ministers, 
           particularly the new Ministers, have been very busy learning their new 
•          jobs and making the preparations necessary to the implementation of the 
           Government's election promises. Some of these matters are easy to 
           implement and others will require some administrative changes and quite 
           lengthy discussions with the States.

                           However, the first Bills have already been introduced 
           into the Parliament to give effect to the increased rate of child endow- 
           ment and also to the endowment of 15/- a week for all student children 
           between the ages of 16 and 21 years. The first payments for both these 
           matters will be made on April 7th. It has already been announced that 
           the payments will be retrospective to January 14th, so the first payment 
           will cover 12 weeks arrears. The increased rate of child endowment, that 
           is 15/- a week for the third and subsequent children, will be paid in the 
           normal way after this, but the payments for student children will be made 
           at twelve weekly intervals. 900,000 children from 520,000 families qualify 
           for the increased rate of child endowment. This alone gives some
           indication of the administrative and staff work involved in making these 
           increased payments.
•                          There is no means test, for either of these payments. 
           If a student is lucky enough to have a scholarship or some other
           educational grant it will not affect the endowment to his parents or 
           guardian. The Minister has also said that spare-time employment under- 
           taken before or after normal school hours or during vacations would not 
           be inconsistent with full-time studies so, therefore, this also will not 
           affect the education endowment. This, of course, would only apply if 
           this part-time employment did not affect full time studies.

                           If parents are already getting endowment for their 
           children, if they qualify for the higher payment it will not be necessary
           to apply - the higher rate will automatically be paid. However, the 
           parents or guardians of student children should make their application to 
           the Director of Social Services in their State to qualify for student
           endowment payments.   Application forms are now being prepared.

                           last week the Prime Minister also announced the terms 
           and conditions that would apply and the machinery that will operate to 
           give effect to the Government's promise to provide £5,000,000 a year for 
           the provision and extension of science facilities in secondary schools, 
           both private and State. Since the provisions of this statement are quite 
           technical and detailed I will deal with this matter in a later talk. In 
           particular, I hope any secondary schools that are interested in the matter 
           will contact me so that I can let them know the machinery which will be 
           established. This is a matter that has and will involve further discussions 
           with the States.

