<!--start metadata-->
Title: International affairs, South-East Asia and Communism
Description: press statement
Date: 5/04/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT:

 MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                        April 5th,1964

                          INTLRNATIONAL AFFAIRS

 GREATER INTEREST IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS -

            In the first weeks of the twenty fifth Parliament there has been 
 much greater debate of foreign affairs than in earlier Parliaments. In 
 the Address-in-Reply members are free to speak on any subject they think
 fit, and many chose this particular subject.  Then, a short while ago, 
 Sir Garfield Barwick presented a comprehensive review of the world and 
 the South East Asian situation to Parliament, and this sparked off a 
 debate solely devoted to foreign affairs.

            It is not difficult to see why there is a greater interest. 
 Our two nearest northern neighbours, Malaysia and Indonesia, have so 
 far found it impossible to get on together and this, of course, greatly 
 concerns us We have pledged our support to Malaysia as has the United 
 Kingdom, but at the same time we want, if possible, to develop friendly 
 relationships with Indonesia. They and we will be neighbours until the 
 end of time, and there is no sensible future, in this part of the world 
 if peace is not maintained]

            What happens, of course, will largely depend on Indonesia's
 policy of Confrontation to Malaysia.  Our decisions have been made on 
 this matters We support Malaysia and will continue to do so, 
 Confrontation cannot be allowed to succeed because past experience has
 shown us that this is the kind of appetite that grows on success. If 
 Indonesia should be successful in her attitude td Malaysia she would, I
 believe, immediately embark on some other excursion. This, of course, 
 would lead to an intolerable situation, and it cannot be allowed to 
 happen.

 CHANGE IN AUSTRALIA'S RELATIONSHIPS -

            There has been a great change in Australia's relationships in 
 the world in the past few years. since the Cuban crisis of 1962 there 
 has been a thawing-out in the relationships between the United States and
 Russia.  This was the first nuclear crisis that the world has seen in 
 which two powers, each with the ability to destroy the world, have
 confronted each other.  In this case, firmness and resolution on the 
 part of the United States caused the withdrawal of nuclear missiles from
 Cuba.  I believe the Cuban crisis has shown Russia that if pressed in a 
 vital interest the western countries, and the United States in particular
will not flinch from using these weapons.  I believe it is for this
 reason we have not seen a renewed crisis over Berlin since Cuba. If 
America had not been firm over Cuba we would certainly have been faced 
with a crisis in Europe.

            It may well be thought that the possible end to this arctic 
winter between Russia and the United States adds to world security and
consequently to Australian security.   In a world-wide context this
is, of course, true.  In a narrow Australian context in regard to
South East Asia it may not necessarily be true.  Let me explain this
by reference to the past.   In 1914 and in 1939 Australia was embroiled 
in world wars because we were allied by ties of blood or by ties of 
treaty with countries greater than ourselves who were forced to go to 
war to defend freedom. We took the only possible course and supported 
the United Kingdom, knowing that freedom in this sense is indivisible 
and that countries believing in the same things must support each other, 
The important thing to note, however, is that in these two wars the 
initial threat was not directed to Australia but to Britain or, perhaps 
in the Pacific to the United States with the disaster at Pearl Harbour. 
These countries, much greater than ourselves, were forced into war and we, 
because we believe in the same things, supported them.

                                                                  /2

                2 -


      The situation now, however, is somewhat different. Australia 
could be faced with an initial threat which would affect us primarily and 
which would affect our friends or our allies only because of their ties of 
blood or of treaty with Australia, or because of their general concern for 
security in this region, believing that any threat to Australia's security 
might ultimately be a threat to their own. But the significant point is 
that the initial attack could be directed to Australia. For this reason 
alliance and friendship with powerful friends is more important to Australia 
today than it ever was.

      The two main treaties, of course, are the SEATO Treaty and, 
more particularly, the Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United 
States,'which commits the United States to assist us if we or if our forces 
are attacked, not only in Australia but in the Pacific theatre. This is 
a powerful Treaty for Australia. It is one which I hope we will never have 
to invoke. And the fact that we have it probably means that its provisions 
will not be called upon.

      In addition, of course, there would be the normal response 
that we could expect from the United Kingdom if we were under attack, just 
as the United Kingdom expected and received assistance from us on two 
previous occasions.

SOUTH EAST ASIA AND COmmunism -

      The next two or three years may well decide whether any parts 
of South East Asia can be saved from Communism. South Vietnam has 
experienced two military coups in the last twelve months. United States 
prestige, energy and money has been spent in trying to fight Communists 
supported and supplied from Communist China, North Vietnam or Communist Laos. 
There can be no certainty that this effort will succeed, even though the 
United States has renewed its pledge to remain in South Vietnam or Communist 
Laos. There can be no certainty that this effort will succeed, even though 
the United States has renewed its pledge to remain in South Vietnam within 
the last few days.

      The danger is not that just South Vietnam might become Communist, 
but that if it did the United States' and,Western prestige would suffer 
immeasurably. Other countries in South East Asia would come to believe 
that the east wind would blow out the west wind. Cambodia, Thailand, 
Burma, even Pakistan allied to us in SEATO, might come to believe that the 
Communist regime is going to win. If this were so these areas would come 
to be dominated by Peking. Malaysia would then face infiltration from the 
north and confrontation from the south and her position would become 
intolerable.

      All this shows that the position in South East Asia is not a 
happy one for the Western World. The answer will not be found in pure 
military terms, but the availability of military forces and military 
effort are necessary in any short-term solution. This underlines the 
fact that Australia is in a vulnerable part of the world, and re-emphasises 
the necessity of our alliances and treaties with major powers.



               o0o

