<!--start metadata-->
Title: Re-equipment of HMAS Melbourne
Description: press statement
Date: 21/11/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


P.Z úSS STATEMENT iiNT .

Mr+1vCOL1'I F11KUL11, u

                                                  November 21st,1965

                   R1;--E UIPìiTZT OF H.M.A.S. ìi3LBOUìiNE


                   A short while ago the Minister for the Navy announced 
some changes in the Naval program which will be of great significance to 
future naval planning.

                   In November of last year it was announced that there 
would be a half-life modernisation of H.M.A.S. Melbourne which would begin 
in the middle of 1967, which would take two years to complete and which
would cost nearly £10M.   It was further stated that the work would depend
upon the existing international situation.  The Government has since 
decided that it would be most unwise to have the MELBOURNE out of action 
for a period at this time and instead iI BOURNE will be put in for extended 
normal re-fit in September, 1967 which will take less than six months to
complete,    Essential modernisation which will include work necessary for 
the carrier's replacement aircraft will be undertaken at that time,

                   Last year, it was announced that I'IPLBOURNE'S anti- 
submarine Gannets would be replaced by 14 tracker aircraft at a cost of £17ií.
These aircraft will be delivered by November, 1967. Last year no announce- 
ment was made concerning MELBOURNE'S fighter aircraft, the Sea Venoms.
These are an old jet aircraft which will reach the end of their service life
within a year or two.    Tests overseas on MELBOURNE have shown that the 
Sky Hawk, the modern light-weight subsonic jet is suitable for operation 
off the M.E,LBOURNE and, as a result, ten Sky Hawks have been ordered to 
replace the Sea Venoms.

                   Every United States carrier has some Sky Hawks in its 
compliment. It is a versatile fighter bomber which can be armed with 20mm. 
guns, air to air missiles, air to ground missiles and rockets and, in
addition, it can carry conventional bombs.  In its American form I believe 
it even has a nuclear capacity but we, of course, have no nuclear weapons.

                   The Sky Hawks are required for the Navy to provide the 
Navy and any convoys under naval protection with a counter weapon against 
hostile aircraft or against certain sophisticated surface to surface 
missiles which are possessed by the Navies of certain potential enemies. 
There are surface to surface missiles which have a range far greater than
the gun range of a modern destroyer.   Such weapons are, however, vulnerable 
to air attack but without the air cover convoys would be at the mercy of any 
Navy possessing such weapons.

                   In addition to this, bombs have now been developed which 
can be released anything from 50 to 150 or more miles from the target and it 
is clear that aircraft area necessity to protect convoys against these stand- 
off bombs as they are called.

                   It may be suggested that land-based aircraft could 
perform this task, but this would place strict limitations on the areas to
which our convoys could be sent.  Land based aircraft of a fighter type 
have a necessarily reasonably short range and they would not be able to offer 
the continuous air cover that could be required in hcstile waters.

                   The decision to purchase the Sky Hawk, in fact, admits two 
principles, the first of these is that under the present circumstances there 
are areas to which our convoys may need to be directed which cannot be given 
adequate air cover from land based planes and, secondly, it implies that we 
should not be dependent upon our Allies for this air cover.


                                                                 /2

                       2 -



             With the Gannets and the Sky Hawks N7LBOURNE will 
have modern equipment and a life of up to ten additional years but 
unless there is some drastic changes in the techniques of sea warfare, 
I believe MELBOURNE may have to be replaced with a more sophisticated 
aircraft carrier at some time in the future,

             An aircraft carrier, of course, represents a large
investment. A suitable carrier would not be easy to find and not 
many of them are built, but I believe the Government should be on the 
lookout for a suitable opportunity to purchase such a carrier.



                   -~---o0o















































                                            /3

                                  3 -


             NEW ASSISTANCE FOR INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS IN THE
                   NORTHERN TERRITORY AND CANBERRA 


                    Since last election some significant steps have been 
 made in Government aid to independent schools.

                    Significant aspects of Government policy at the last 
  election involved the introduction of aid for independent schools for the 
  establishment of science facilities. This particular area had been chosen 
 for assistance because the Government not only believed that independent 
  schools required help, but also because there is a national need for an 
 increased number of technicians, for more scientists, and it has been felt 
 that students cannot get the best advantage from a University education 
 unless the standards of training in secondary schools were helped,

                    Many schools are now using science facilities that have 
 been established as a result of this Government assistance, and this policy 
 will, of course, continue.

                    Independent schools in the Australian Capital Territory 
 have had a particular problem and have had a different kind of Government
 assistance.     For a considerable period the population of Canberra has 
 been growing extraordinarily rapidly as a result of the Government's 
 decision to move Departments from some of the Capital cities of the States
 to the Capital of Australia.    Thus, the population of Canberra has been 
 growing more rapidly than most other areas as a direct result of Government 
 decision.

                    Many of Canberrats new citizens have wanted to send
 their children to independent schools, and if they had been left in Melbourne
 or Sydney they would have.    The influx of people to Canberra over a 
 period of time has consequently placed a severe strain on the resources of 
 people wishing to construct in&jendnt schools and thus for a considerable 
 period in Canberra the Government has been paying a subsidy up to the long- 
 term bond rate toward meeting the interest charges incurred by independent
 schools when they hase borrowed money for their construction. This 
 assistance was first paid for secondary schools in Canberra and more recently 
 for primary schools.


                    In future, the Prime Minister has announced that the 
 Government will continue to meet interest charges on approved borrowings of 
 capital for the Northern Territory and the A.C.T., but will also repay the
 amounts borrowed for approved projects.  Capital repayments will be made
 by equal annual instalments over a period of twenty years.  The Government 
 believes that this decision will help independent schools in the two 
 Territories by removing the necessity for the schools to repay borrowed 
 capital and by helping them to borrow at reasonable rates of interest.

                    The new assistance will apply tc approved projects 
 constructed or begun over the next ten years, and also to a group of projects 
 under construction or on the point of starring.

                    For the schools in the Australian Capital Territory and 
 in the Northern Territory the new form of assistance will replace, for the 
 future, assistance now available to provide science facilities. The new 
 assistance is, of course, on a much wider basis and covers a much wider field. 
 Where assistance is given, as with present assistance for science facilities, 
 the Government will have to be satisfied of course not only tnat the facilities 
 are required but that the standards of construction are adequate.


                   This is an increased significant departure from past 
policies and should do a great deal to assist the independent schools , 
over the two regions which have particular problems to overcome.

