<!--start metadata-->
Title: Tax avoidance schemes
Description: electoral talk
Date: 31/05/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                         J~~AII3TRALIA      EMBARGO: 5:00 pm




                          PRIME MINISTER


• FOR MEDIA                                         SUNDAY, 31 MAY, 1981


                                ELECTORATE TALK


  Last week, John Howard introduced new legislation into the
  Parliament to stamp out the gross tax avoidance schemes that
  have been growing up in our community. Since 1977, the Government
  has introduced 12 bills incorporating some 28 measures against
  such schemes. But what has been happening up to now is that
  as soon as one scheme is stopped a new one is thought up. The
  new legislation is designed to prevent this from happening.
  Its aim is to make impossible all versions of anti-social
  tax avoidance.

  Anyone who pays less than their fair share of tax does so at the 
  expense of every other taxpayer, at the expense of every decent 
  member of Australian society. We believe that any person who 
 'claims the privileges of being an Australian resident, who benefits 
  from the services provided by the Government and the protection 
  of the law, must contribute his or her fair share by way of 
  tax contributions.

  We believe that there is no real difference between the person who 
  finds an artificial loophole to slip out of tax and the person who 
  falsely declares his income. An anti-avoidance provision was
  already part of the law. However, over the years the courts had 
  cast doubt on its meaning and its interpretation had become so 
  narrow as to be largely ineffective against avoidance.

  When reasonable men can come to very different views as to what 
  tax avoidance is, it becomes difficult to cast the law in terms 
  which will strike down blatant or contrived schemes, but which will 
  not hinder reasonable commercial or family dealings. The new 
  legislation is expressed in terms which would eliminate schemes 
  which, when their circumstances and results are objectively examined, 
  have no practical effect other than a reduction of tax liability. 
  In order to ensure that people who still think they can get away 
  with avoidance are not taking a "one way bet" in doing so, the 
  legislation provides for penalty tax equal to twice the amount of 
  tax sought to be avoided.

  This approach, and the Bill itself, is the result of long and
  careful study, not only by Departmental officers and by Parliamentary
  counsel, but also by private legal counsel and the Taxation
  Advisory Committee. We sought and welcomed constructive comments
  on the provisions of the Bill.

                      - 2 -


 At the same time, we have introduced legislation which requires the 
 courts to have regard to the intention of the law rather than 
 solely to the fine points of language. It is our hope that the 
 decisions of courts will accept the spirit of this taxation 
 legislation rather than just relying on the letter. It is a matter 
 of great regret that it is necessary for legislation to be used 
 to stamp out tax cheating. For if all taxpayers accepted their 
 responsibility to the whole community, if they accepted that they 
 should pay what is justly required of them to provide public 
 services, we would not need to devote part of the community's 
 resources to seeking out the tax cheats,to the time consuming 
 process of framing laws.

 Because some people get away with paying less than their fair share- 
 of tax, but are still consuming public services paid for by the 
 rest of us, the tax burden on the decent,responsible taxpayer is 
 higher than it otherwise would be. The cost to the community of 
 tax avoidance is not measured simply by how much more tax the 
 rest of us have to pay because others pay less, and because tax 
 revenue must be devoted to devising and implementing anti-avoidance 
 laws and prosecuting those caught cheating, the cost also includes 
 the resources, the time, and the effort of the tax cheats and 
 their advisers devoted to seeking out and implementing novel ways 
 of cheating the tax system. If those resources, that time and effort, 
 were put into responsible, productive activities, the whole community 
 would be wealthier and Australia would be a more decent country.

 There is another dimension to this tax avoidance issue. The effect
—of-our legislation will be to force people to do what they surely 
 know was right anyway. So the new legislation should not have been 
 necessary at all. It is vastly important that we all recognise 
 that the kind of Australia we want cannot be made by laws alone. 
 Indeed, if every anti-social activity had to be banned by law, we 
 would be overwhelmed by law, and freedom could not survive.
 In a free society, people must accept mutual obligations based on 
 the morality of respect for others.







                        ---000---

