<!--start metadata-->
Title: Review of Commonwealth functions, health arrangements, financial policy, Premiers' Conference
Description: electoral talk
Date: 10/05/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRIME t\flINISTER


FOR MEDIA      SUNDAY, 10 MAY, 1981


          ELECTORATE TALK


Over the last two weeks the Government has taken a number of 
decisions designed to set Australia firmly on course for 
the 1980s and beyond. These decisions relate to the Review 
of Commonwealth Functions, the new health arrangements, and 
the new financial arrangements_ with the States determined at 
the Premiers' Conference last Monday.

The Government is determined that Australia not go the way of 
other countries whose prosperity and future have been undermined 
by ever-growing bureaucracy and ever higher taxes.

We are at a very important stage of Australia's development. 
Australia is a country with great prospects - provided we take 
wise and responsible decisions now. This is a time when we 
must establish the framework for the economic growth and 
development on which Australia's future depends.

Our aim is to see that Australia has a high rate of economic 
growth - which will provide rising standards of living through 
higher incomes. We aim to achieve growth through lower inflation 
and greatly expanded job opportunities. This growth will provide 
increasing resources to support improved assistance to those in 
need, to education, to the arts, to health, to the environment. 
It is the pre-condition for so many other of our objectives.

Australia can only achieve these goals if Government is modernised 
and streamlined and made more efficient; if bureaucracy and 
over-regulation are reduced and if the tax burden can be lightened. 
They can only be achieved if we realise as a people that there 
is not a limitless supply of money to do all that we want, all 
at once, that we must establish priorities and direct our resources. 
to the most important needs of the time.

To achieve these objectives it is vitally important that Government 
does not take too many of the scarce financial resources which 
private enterprise needs in order to develop and create the jobs 
we all want to see. By exercising responsible restraint over 
Government spending, we free money for other needs of greater 
priority. And by rationalising Government functions we open up 
new opportunities.

                         - 2 -


 T mention particularly here our decision to establish a new 
 institute for energy research which I announced as part of the 
 Review of Commonwealth Functions. Energy is a top national 
 priority for the Government, and anew institute will make a 
major contribution.

 Our new health arrangements also reflect the philosophy that 
 Government should concentrate its help on those who really 
 need help. We do not believe that taxpayers' money should be 
 used to pay unnecessary subsidies to the well-to-do. Labor's 
 health scheme proved far too costly, it created unnecessary' 
 centralisation in the administration of health care, and it undermined 
 the effective provision of medical services. We do not believe
 in undermining individual responsibility by centralised       x. 
 bureaucracy, nor do we believe in schemes which must be paid for'-- 
 by higher taxes, disbursed by officials, rather than by individuals 
 who know their own needs best.

 We believe that where the user-can afford to pay, the user should 
 pay - and have the influence that comes from paying. We reject. 
 the assumption that Canberra knows best, that officials know best, 
 and that it is Government, not individuals, who should control 
 the payment of doctors and hospitals. Our scheme is designed to 
 encourage a system of voluntary insurance. We are confident 
 that this scheme will improve the efficiency of our health system 
 and its responsiveness to individual needs.

 If taxes are to be reduced to the greatest extent possible, this 
 is not a matter for the Federal Government alone. If inflation 
 is to be reduced to the maximum extent possible, the Federal 
 Government alone cannot achieve this. Federal Government'policies 
 can provide the conditions for success or lead to failure in the 
 achievements of these objectives, but their full realisation 
 depends also on the co-operation of the States and of individuals 
 around Australia.

 At the Premiers' Conference we took the view that the greatest 
 possible restraint should be followed in the interests of 
 Australia's taxpayers. The States and local Government are the 
 final spenders of just over 50% of the tax dollars collected 
 in Australia. Reducing the tax burden, achieving higher economic 
 growth, more jobs, and lower inflation requires a high degree of 
 restraint and forward thinking on the part of all Governments. 
 The Victorian Government has recently established a Ministerial 
 group of a kind similar to our own Review of Commonwealth Functions 
 to examine State spending and activities. I know that all 
 Victorians will welcome this initiative. Likewise the South 
 Australian Government has established a deregulation unit in. 
 the Premiers' Department. It is very encouraging that other States 
 are also planning for the future.

 The real question is for the Commonwealth and  States together
 to establish the conditions under which there can be a responsible 
 lightening of the tax burden in Australia as economic growth
 picks up. The Commonwealth's policies of restraint and forward 
 thinking have already set us firmly on that course.

            3


From the first of July this year the indexation tax cut as 
a consequence of our election commitment will give to Australia's 
taxpayers some $500 million that would otherwise be absorbed 
by Government. The new health arrangements provide for a tax 
rebate to those who take out private insurance. The costs of 
these rebates to the Government's revenue will be of a similar 
order to that of half tax indexation. These tax concessions 
are possible only because of the policies which the Government 
has followed.

The maintenance of these policies over the next few years will 
make possible a further lightening of the burden of taxation 
in Australia, a. further reduction in the size of Government, and 
a considerable increase in Australia's economic strength and - 
prosperity. The decisions of the last few weeks have set Austral 
firmly on course to a strong and healthy society. They will help 
to secure to Australia a place in the world that we all wish 
her to have.








           ---000---

