<!--start metadata-->
Title: The 1967 Budget
Description: radio talks
Date: 22/08/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                         ~J a......~f 7C.~ ~.. ~ •~ _c. tLaSt.Q.o~.~—



 RADIO SPEECH                                         22 August 1967
 MALCOLM FRASER



                          THE 1967 BUDGET


         Last Tuesday, the Treasurer introduced his second Budget. The 
 total Budget is not far short of $6,500 million and you might well think 
 that with a vast sum of this kind the Government and the Treasurer would 
 have a good deal of flexibility to decide where our funds should be spent. 
 It would be very pleasant if this were so but in fact by far the greater 
 part of Budget expenditure is already committed before the Government begins 
 the Budget discussions. The Bills for Defence, Social Services, Repatriation, 
 are not completely but in large measure fixed by decisions that have already 
 been taken in earlier times and so there is only room for marginal adjust- 
 ments which, by themselves, might be reasonably large but which only 
 represent a very small part of the total Budget.

         I mentioned that the total Budget expenditure will be just short of 
 $6,500 million. Total revenues are estimated to be $5,887 million and this 
 will leave about $596 million to be financed from borrowings, which is 
 $61 million more than the amount borrowed last year. These figures are very 
 large but Commonwealth expenditure has been restrained to a certain extent 
 over this year. The rate of increase over the previous year was 91% against 
 a rate of increase of 11% in the year earlier. On the other hand it is 
 estimated that revenue this year will increase by $499 million where it only 
 increased by $306 million last year. So this is a big improvement over the 
 earlier period.

         These are the total figures. Let me look at some of the major items 
 of expenditure. Last year we spent $950 million on Defence. This was
 $50 million below the estimate because some equipment ordered from abroad was 
 not completed and the bills were not presented last year. The $950 million 
 dollars was 27% above the previous year. Thisyear we are providing $1,118 million 
 an increase of $168 million or 18% on last year's figure. Five years ago the 
 Defence Bill was only $428 million, $700 million less than this year's estimates. 
 This tremendous increase in Defence spending has been accomplished with
 relatively little change in the normal civilian rate of expansion and rate of 
 growth in the economy but it is quite clear that if these resources could have 
 been devoted to development or to welfare a great deal more could have been 
 achieved. The Treasurer pointed out that Australia would not be able to afford 
 to continue a rate of growth in Defence spending of this kind. We will be 
 spending about 5% of gross national product this year on Defence. Of the 
western countries, only the United States, Britain and France are devoting a 
larger potion of their resources to Defence than we are. We know that

                2.


British Defence expenditure is falling while the United States is in a 
different category and cannot really be compared with us.

    There is another aspect of Defence spending that concerns the 
Government and this is the spending which is involved overseas. Five years 
ago external costs of Defence were under $100 million a year. This year 
they may be over $350 million which would represent about 11% of our export 
earnings. This is one of the reasons why the Defence Services, where 
possible, have a policy of buying in Australia and I am pleased to be able 
to say that the Army spends about 80% of its capital equipment vote in 
Australian factories.

    International aid is another large and growing field of Government 
expenditure overseas. What we are doing in this field is not as well known 
as it should be. Unlike all other aid-giving countries we provide our official 
aid in grants without any strings attached. Most other countries provide their 
aid in loans and grants that must be spent in the country of origin. This 
year our aid will total $142 million or 0.75% of our estimated national 
income. Of all the countries of the west, only France can point to a better 
performance than that. In recent years, our aid has been growing rapidly 
where that of most other countries has been falling.

    The major items of overseas aid go to various programmes under the 
auspices of the United Nations, and to the Colombo Plan, SEATO Aid programme, 
to food aid for countries such as India, or to the Territories of. Papua and 
New Guinea which is the largest single recipient; this year our aid to 
the Territories represents over $91 million.

    The other very large field of Commonwealth expenditure which is 
nearly all pre-empt because of previous decisions is Social Services, Health 
and Repatriation. These are the national welfare payments. Expenditure in 
this field will rise by more than $50 million to a total of $1,332 million. 
This is a larger sum than all the pay-as-you-earn income tax collections of 
the last financial year. It is important to remember that when we are 
talking about all these payments they do not represent something which 
basically belongs to the Commonwealth. They represent something which has 
been collected from every one of us as individuals and which is paid out by 
the Commonwealth in the interests of the nation. But these tremendous sums 
can only be obtained by the imposition of tax on individual people.

    Let me now break up this figure of $1,332 million. $1,071 million 
will be paid out in age, invalid and widows' pensions, in child endowment, 
in medical and hospital benefits, and in other benefits and services in the 
field of health and home savings grants. In spite of these very large sums,

t                    3.


    additional pâyments are being made this year. For the fourth and each subsequent 
    child in a family child endowment will be progressively increased by 25¢. Thus, 
    for the fourth child the payments will be $1.75 a week, for the fifth child 
    it will be $2 and so on. A family of 9 children under 16 years would, there- 
    fore, get an additional $5.25 a week. You may say that there are not many 
    families of this size but I think it would be difficult to deny that the 
    financial burden of rearing a family falls most heavily on those with four or 
    more children and the Government has sought to alleviate this hardship.

        There will be some other small benefits for the moderately retarded, 
    for deserted wives and the wives of prisoners. A useful new improvement 
    will be to authorise the Commonwealth Accoustic Laboratories to supply 
    hearing aids on loan for a nominal charge to pensioners with defective 
    hearing. The cost of these four proposals will be $10 million in a full 
    year.

        Repatriation expenditure will increase by $11 million this year to 
    $261 million. The only increase in repatriation pensions this year is for 
    war orphans. For children who have lost one parent through war service, 
    the pension will rise to $4.40 for the first child and to $3.25 for the 
    second and other children. For those children who have lost both parents 
    the pension will rise to $8.15 for each child.

        Although I have mentioned the details of this Budget, we should try 
    and remember that the Budget is not only concerned with detail. Its main 
    purpose is to try and maintain an even balance in the economy. We seek to 
    keep a reasonable pressure on resources to maintain adequate employment, so 
    that there is good progress throughout the country. In the Budget we need 
    to avoid two extremes — the pressures that would lead to undue inflation 
    must be minimised and any slackness that might lead to unemployment and 
    hardship in another direction must also be avoided. The Government't best 
    means of maintaining such control is by its Budget.

        In this year, the Government believes that the economy is reasonably 
    well balanced. At this point of time, there is no need for strong measures 
    to depress the economy and oppose inflation, and thus there are no new taxes 
    in this Budget. On the other hand, the economy is marching forward fairly 
    strongly and the Treasurer did not want to exert any additional stimulus which 
    might well spark off an undue inflationary movement. These were the main 
    reasons which led him to try and avoid tax increases and to contain the 
    growth in Commonwealth expenditure.

