<!--start metadata-->
Title: First week of the spring session
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 1/09/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                         3HA - 1/9/57 
                                                         3YB ® 4/9/57



              of      irat hills to be passed this Session was c s 11

but important one oonc outing the ' ool Industry. .t wool Testing :',uthority 
is being established to isue inte nationelly recognised certificates con- 
e() /ling scoured cad carbonised wool,
          These certificates will relate in particular to tear

   tent of scoured and carbonised wool sold abroad. They will be of 
increasing importance since our trade ;n these fields, especially to Sian 
countries,ia increasing, quito noticeably. In general 16A or 17°% water 
content is allowed in clean wool but there is no method of knowing the 
water content without special tests. For exempla if freshly scoured 
and dried wool is baled and shipped quickly tee water content could he 
very low and oonsoqu+ently ag eta buying for overseas purchasers may well 
supply more wool then necessary   Scoured and °urbanised wool will naturally 
regain up to 16% or 1?i. of wate  ram the atmosphere and this is about the
internationally recojnisad level.   The new cortiticatea will show the exact 
percentages at the time of t:ec the end therefore buyers will know their 
exact position. The certificates of the new internatioe liy recognised 
Wool Testing uthority will greatly help the sale or scoured and carbonised

 col in the world's markets.
          In tie weak VI. MtEwen introduced the yapanese Trade Agreement.
  have , already explained this agreement but thee has been such concerted 
props na about it that I want to repeat one or two salient points. Last 
year eps bought Z14O acilliou of goods from us, are bought la4 million 
from them. -mite clearly this position odh not last forever. Japan wo 
have been forced to restri ;t her buying from us and what weul:. only make 
 OUR own trade difficulties worse. The Japanese have no right to seed. 
goods here; their goods will only coma to eustralie on the initiative 
 of Australian importers, If there is any evidenee of serious injury coming 
 to Australian manufacturers through the Trudde Wean-Dal than the Govern- 
 ment can invoke emergency powers with which the i `arlie rest equipped itself 
 through legislation passed last year. It is known that certain .Australian 
 industries are sensitive to outside competition and these will be care- 
 fully watched. Ur. ci en has said he will discuss any problem of the 
 sensitive industries with their industry leaders. The Japanese have been 
 warned that if they try to flood this country with eoods produced by these

                                Z








ind4rtries, than our own emergency powers will be used.




           These powerewere costarred on the Yederal karliament by an 




amend t to tho Guatems and ìaritX Innustries rreservation Act last 




yeur. ite Governuent eau impose prohibitive duties or quantitivaL 




restriction on coods comiag into Australia vc;ich would seriously injure 




Australian industry*




           The Itade Agreement does not increase the value of imports




comina to this country by even Li.  import licencea have not been




increased as a result   tìe Agreameat.




           7he irade i.igreeasnt does not give the Japanese any special




     . or privileges. Before, we discriminated against tnen in many ways.




Sor insteacc, ir import licesees were issued they would be valid for all 




countries but Japaa, sad Jayanese goods coming to Australia had to pay 




hicher dutieo than tan gooaa from any other country. These special




restristions aGaii.st Japanese trade have been abolished. They are now on 

     competitive
an equal/fa:Ain& with othw foreign countrias. (*teat Britain's preferastil position, of Courae, remains untouched.












           VA° Textile True is one that has so tar complained vigorously 




sbaut the Agreement. In large I don't think thei; fears are justified.




           Lt ZA give the axample of blankets - a product that 00E= 




from an importaat industry la ;iatrnanbool. In the last five years 




importation fro ll source has easel 3;= of the total Australian market. 




Raw the last 3 yearsthoze has bea, no distrimisRtion in import licensing 




policy against Japan concezning blankets aad Imports frou that country 




havo boon negligible. Last year thair total value VMS Z342.




           it Trade Agroesont will help ladustry because by enauring 




overimas markets tor our primary proauots it will euablo our primary 




industries to wan the vast quantitios of ovarseas inooma necessary to 




pay for tho raw materials aad cal;ital equipment which absorbs well 




over 70 of all our over aus income and without which Intiustry would 




be unable to oempoto in comlletitivo texme.










30/S/1957.

