<!--start metadata-->
Title: Water, drought
Description: electoral talk
Date: 15/11/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


DRAFT ELECTORATE TALK FOR SUNDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 1981


Water is always a major problem in Australia. There is 
either too much or too little, or in the wrong place or at 
the wrong time.

Rainfall is often very localised, seasonal and has large 
annual variations. The availability of sufficient supplies is 
a key factor in agricultural and industrial development. 
Much of the annual rainfall run-off occurs in places far from 
centres of demand, often in remote tropical locations.

The severe drought last summer and autumn was one of the 
worst on record in many areas of this country. It had a 
very wide impact and one of its most significant lessons 
was to highlight the extent to which irrigation development 
in many parts of Australia has out-stripped assured water 
supplies. Fortunately, there has been almost record winter 
rainfall over much of southern Australia, but it would be 
folly to rely on a rare occurrence as bountiful as this to 
solve our long-term water problems.
The recent drought also attracted a sustained public and 
media interest in River Murray salinity problems and water 
quality generally.

The Commonwealth, in close co-operation with the three States 
principally involved and with the River Murray Commission, has 
taken an historic step to resolve these problems. However, 
further research is necessary to ensure that water supply 
problems do not hold back important developments which are 
vital to the growth of Australia.

                     - 2 -

Throughout most Of the 1970's, our national planning focussed, 
to a large degree, on our ihineral and energy resources. 
Rightly so, as these will make a significant contribution to 
the prosperity of future generations òf Australians. In our 
considerations, the availability of water necessary for the 
exploitation of these resources was not an overriding factor 
in relation to either quantity or quality; in fact, it was 
possible to meet requirements at an acceptable level of 
cost even in remote arid areas of tropical Australia.

However, it is now a matter for concern as to whether we can 
continue to assume the continued availability of water within 
the range of costs which has prevailed until now. There are 
already indications of conflicts developing in the use of 
available water resources, and these conflicts will require 
equitable solutions having regard to the enormous quantities 
of water which will be required to support our burgeoning 
energy and energy-related industries.

While the States are primarily involy       n of
water supplies, the Commonwealth has played a vital role through 
the National Water Resources Program. The stage has now been 
reached at which it is necessary for Commonwealth Departments 
and agencies, State water authorities and other appropriate 
organisations to collaborate in a program of research to
provide the information on which to base a perspective for the 
future, so that options and priorities may be clarified. The 
co-operation of the States in such a study is of course quite 
essential and will be sought very shortly.

We wish to obtain an up-to-date assessment of Australia's 
surface and underground water resources as regards both
quantity and quality; we shall need estimates of future 
water usage demands and an indication of the implications for 
the water program of new proposals and plans. Above all, we 
must identify clearly the main,emerging issues of national 
significance and the options for effective fulfillment of needs.

                      - 3

The benefits which can be gained from this research are 
out of all proportion to the relatively modest costs, which 
have been estimated in terms of Commonwealth expenditure at 
about $250,000 this financial year and about $500,000 next year.

Our National Water Resources Program has been a very useful 
vehicle for assisting the States in the development and 
management of their water resources for projects of national 
significance, or in special circumstances. Unfortunately, 
as in practically all areas of government expenditures, we 
have had to implement the Program in line with our overall 
budgetary strategy for containing inflation.

Nevertheless, by the end of this financial year, we will have 
provided over $110 million which, together with the States' 
matching contributions, will mean a total expenditure of over 
$220 million since 1978/79 on projects selected on the basis 
of State priorities. Progress on the Bundaberg Irrigation 
Project in Queensland, flood mitigation works on the flood-prone 
New South Wales coastal rivers and salinity control works in 
three States in the Murray Valley was made possible as a result 
of our initiative in establishing the National Water
Resources Program.

As we enter the last two decades of the century, against a 
background of clear indications that our water resources are 
likely to come under increased pressures, the time has come for 
us to have a close look at our future water needs over this 
period, and the problems likely to emerge in meeting new 
demands and halting trends in the deterioration of water 
quality in important resources.

The Government has decided, therefore, to initiate an examination 
of likely future water requirements, related management problems 
and the possible scope for action to improve the availability 
of our national water resources, in terms of both quantity 
and quality. I am sure we can look forward to the co-operation 
of the States in this investigation as our basic objective

               - 4

will be to collect and analyse the information necessary 
for assessing what role would be appropriate for the Commonwealth 
to help the States cope with future water problems of national 
significance.

The decision to initiate this study is an indication of our 
intention to ensure that water resource problems do not 
constrain the nation's development. We look for information 
which will guide us in water resource development as far as 
the turn of this century, so that the general expansion of 
Australia may go forward untramelled by any water shortage 
problems which can be prevented by wise foresight, and the 
best use of our skills and planning resources.






               ---000---

