<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry
Description: press statement
Date: 20/09/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:                                                September 20th 1960
          The Member for Wannon, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, said that the Minister for 
Primary Industry, Mr. Adermann, recently issued a press statement which could be
of great significance for the future of the wool industry. The text of the statement is 
as follows:-
              "The Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. C. F. Adermann, said
          today he had met a joint deputation from the Australian Woolgrowers' and 
          Graziers' Council and the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation 
          to discuss a proposal for a high level independent inquiry into wool market- 
          ing, which the two organizations had previously developed in conference.
                Mr. Adermann said he had agreed to refer the deputation's request 
          to the Commonwealth Government for early consideration.
                The deputation emphasised the importance of having a thorough 
          inquiry to analyse all aspects of wool marketing so that the industry and 
          the Government would be fully informed before considering whether any 
          changes in the present wool marketing system may be necessary or desirable 
          in the best interests of the woolgrowing industry."
          Mr. Fraser said every woolgrower can be heartened by the fact that this 
statement clearly shows that the two organizations, the Australian Woolgrowers' and 
Graziers' Council and the Australian Meat and Wool Producers' Federation are co-
operating for the benefit of the industry much more so than formerly.    He said we 
must hope that this co-operation will continue and, as individual growers, we should 
do what we can to assist this co-operation.
          Mr. Fraser drew attention to the end of the first paragraph - that section 
that points out that the two organizations had previously developed the idea about an
independent inquiry into wool marketing in conference.    This shows clearly that the
two organisations had been meeting together to discuss joint problems.    This is good 
for the industry and must be encouraged.
          It is heartening that the organizations had been able to come to a sufficient 
degree of agreement to approach the Minister for Primary Industry in a joint deputation 
to ask him to place before the Commonwealth Government a proposal to have a full 
inquiry into all aspects of wool marketing.
          Since both these organizations have asked the Minister to place this 
request before the Government, Mr. Fraser said he would be greatly surprised if 
the Government did not meet the request of the organizations.
          It can also be implied from the Minister's statement that such an inquiry is 
a pre-requisite to a decision by the industry itself on its own future.
          Mr. Fraser said there have been one or two objections to an impartial inquiry
                                                                                       /2

s

                                                      2.

     although he did not think these objections had any real substance. Surely if anyone 
     is confident in the case that they put forward for any change that they propose in the 
     marketing of wool, they would not object to an impartial inquiry composed of men of
     the highest calibre examining the proposal.            If the proposal is good and sound and 
     if people have confidence in it, it would certainly be supported by a great many more
     members of the industry if an impartial inquiry also supported that particular proposal.
                 Another objection has been that people would not give true and proper evid- 
     ence or that the inquiry could not compel true and proper evidence to be given. 
     Regarding this, Mr. Fraser said that any person or organization that refused to 
     give evidence or refused to answer frankly any questions put to them would appear
     in a most unfavourable light.         If the Committee wishes - assuming that it is to be
     established - it could ask the Government to pass legislation to give it powers to
     compel evidence to be brought forward.            However, it was not thought that this
     would be necessary because of the stigma that would attach to any person or organ- 
     ization that refused to deal frankly with a Committee of this kind.
                 Another objection has been the delay that this would cause. Having
     regard to the fact that the organizations have argued since 1948 without getting 
     anywhere, without any sign of agreement, a few months spent during which an impar- 
     tial Committee would conduct its proceedings, would seem to be months well spent.
                 Mr. Fraser said he believed that this was the only way that could settle 
     this long standing argument without increased bitterness. It was felt that the leaders 
     of the organizations have, perhaps, recognized this in making their joint approach to 
     the Minister.
                 Both organizations and the Government recognize that there is urgency
     about this matter.       The present price of wool is certainly not an economic one for 
     many producers at the present time, especially in the high cost areas. Woolgrowers 
     have sometimes tended to think that they have been left to fend for themselves in 
     regard to these matters. If woolgrowers have had this impression, it is due in no 
     small part to the fact that there has been no unity in the industry up to the present
     time.     Now there is the beginnings of unity and everything possible must be done to 
     foster that.
                 Mr. Fraser went on to say that the Government is most concerned about
     the position of the wool industry in particular.         The Government is well aware that
     it is not only the prosperity of woolgrowers that is involved but also the prosperity 
     and future development programmes of Australia. A sound and prosperous wool
     industry is essential to Australia's continued and rapid development.               The Govern- 
     ment is aware of this as much as anyone else.
                                                                                                  . %3

r

                                          3.

               As far as could be seen, an independent inquiry will achieve two most
     important objectives. It will be a first step in solving the vexed marketing
     issue which has caused bitterness in wool industry relations for far too long, and 
     secondly, if this beginning of co-operation can be successful in this sphere, it will 
     open up a future of much greater co-operation between the industry's organizations. 
     This will be important in difficult economic times that may lie ahead of the industry. 
     It will further greatly strengthen the industry in any dealings it may want to make
     with the government of the day. The leaders of these two organizations have at 
     last given a lead in co-operation for the benefit of the industry that has been long 
     awaited by rank and file members. It was hoped that all members of the industry 
     would feel that they could support this move wholeheartedly.

