<!--start metadata-->
Title: Petrol tax
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 19/05/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                              21-71.     1 7/~ ~~ ~ °°7

                   PETROL TAX                    r -~~~-/~~~~
        By: Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.



          Victoria has been fighting for a greater share of the

Petrol Tax distribution for a long time. She has put forward an 

impressive case but despite this, she has not succeeded in getting 

what she wants, that is, a greater proportionate share of the money 

distributed by the Commonwealth for road purposes.

          A brief look at the nature of this problem will, perhaps,

show wby.

          Firstly, the formula cannot be altered at will by the 

Federal Government. It was drawn up by agreement between the 

Commonwealth and the States. It has been renewed several times 

and if it is to be altered it will, I am sure, be altered by agree- 

ment and not by the unilateral action of the Commonwealth. This is 

particularly the case since this Federal Government at least has 

been particularly careful to safeguard State rights and interests 

as much as possible. This moans that any campaign to alter the 

formula must get the support of a majority of States. The support 

of Victorian Federal Members is not enough because once the

formula has been fixed by agreement, the Federal Government can 

only use its discretion over the amount of money to be distributed.

          Secondly, Victoria has based its campaign largely, if 

not solely, on the fact that we put far mare into the Petrol Tax

than we get in return.  An oft-quoted figure is that we contribute 

something like £15M. and are only getting in return £5.5M. I feel 

this is a pity because the measure of what we put in and what we 

get out is not an argument for need. It would be a poor thing if 

each taxpayer tried to apply it to himself. suite clearly, as the 

richest State in every way, our contribution to the general pool 

for the progress of all Australia must be greater than what we 

take out of that pool. We have at times almost argued as if we 

were an independent State where, in reality, we are a pert of a 

great Commonwealth.

           To the present time, nearly everytbing that has been 

said in the Petrol Tax campaign has antagonised other States.

We argue against the formula and say it must be changed. Out of

                           E


 any given swot of money this must leave some other States, at least,

 worse off. Can wgéapeot other kÿremiers at a FremierB' Conference 

 to vote themselves less money just to help us? We also say t1-Bt 

 other States have misused their funds and that their degree of

 self help is small. The second and probably the first of these

 charges is true of Western Australia. Their local rates are low and 

 they have spent money in the metropolitan area where votes are to

 be found.   As a result, country roads have suffered. This is

 not an argument against money going to Western Australia so much 

 es one for tighter conditions in any new agreement.

          In .wueensland, the othër State that has come under fire,
       of
 neither/the above charges would be true. they have enormous

 difficulties of great distance, high costs, a total of 132,030 miles. 

 In addition, the latest Department of Shipping and Transport figures 

 show that their degree of self help from local government sources

 is greater than Victoria - £4/16/0 per head of population as 

against £3/12/0.

          I say these things Ulm not because I Um unsympathetic

to Victoria's case but because unless we as Victorians understand 

thee, we will never solve the problem of roads.

           we need a new approach, a campaign that will commend 

the support of other States, not one as at present that automatically 

earns their antagonism. If we from Victoria can put forward such

a campaign we will be doing the Nation a service. As Vidbrians, 

we must admit that to change the formula may build more roads in

this State but it will not build more roads throughout Australia 

and that is the real problem.

           The real problem of roads is not one of planning so much 

as one of money.

          Next week I will put forth some suggestions which I 

believe could solve our present problems and achieve what we all 

want for a better deal for roads.

