<!--start metadata-->
Title: Fall of Saigon
Description: electoral talk
Date: 4/04/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 Electoral Talk                   for Sunday April 4 
                                  and

 This week saw the fall of Saigon and the end of the 
 existence of South Vietnam as an independent nation. 
 The news came as I was completing my series of visits as 
 leader of the opposition to the different Australian 
 states.

 At the beginning of the week I visited Perth, and I also
 met graziers and vegetable growers in Carnarvon to talk with
 them about"the problems of rural industry in a time of 
 inflation,`

 In South Australia I spoke to audiences in Adelaide and in
Murray Bridge, the centre of a mixed farming district

 In the meantime, north of Australia, tanks were rolling 
towards Saigon, and the city finally fell on Wednesday,

I feel strongly that in the present world state of uncertainty, 
and with the United States congress increasingly isolationist 
in mood, there is need for Australia to be more self reliant
in defence.

The end of the South Vietnamese government dramatises 
this.

However, there are two circumstances of special relevance 
to Australia in this affair,

The first is the Government's handling of the problem of 
refugees from South Vietnam and the second and connected 
point concerns the links being developed by the Australian 
Government with the Government of North Vietnam.

Enough has come to light to show that the Australian 
Government was wearing two faces in its relations with the


For the south, the tone was a cold one - one

The Government of President Thieu was taken to task over 
its attempts to obtain from the Americans sufficient 
ammunition and equipment to replace what it was losing,

By implication it was also blamed for the breakdown, when 
the Viet Cong walked out, of the talks to set up a National 
Council of National Reconciliation and Concord.

In contrast, North Vietnam was offered understanding and 
encouragement, even advice on how best to handle its foreign 
relations while the military campaign against the South was

But what had actually happened was that the Prime Minister 
had fallen for a typical communist tactic.

He had been led on, and then the North Vietnamese had shifted 
ground and demanded more.

There should have been no reason for surprise, because this 
is what happenêd during the negotiations which began more 
than two years ago for a settlement in Vietnam.

When agreement was finally reached,Athe North Vietnamese 
changed ground again, walking out of talks with the South and 
then demanding, first the withdrawal of all Americans from 
Vietnam, and then the resignation of the Thieu Government.

They had at least the support of the Deputy Prime Minister 
for in February, Dr. Cairns wrote to the North Vietnamese 
embassy in Canberra promising a sympathetic ear for these 
new conditions.

When they were eventually met, Saigon fell and became 
Ho Chi Minh City.

