<!--start metadata-->
Title: River Murray waters agreement
Description: electoral talk
Date: 20/10/1981
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         PRIME MINISTER


FOR MEDIA         TUESDAY, 20 OCTOBER, 1981•
 STATEMENT TO THE HOUSE: RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT


I am pleased to inform the House that the Commonwealth,
New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia have endorsed 
a draft of a new River Murray Waters Agreement. This was the 
outcome of a meeting which the Minister for National Development. 
and Energy and I attended last Friday in Melbourne, together 
with the three respective Premiers and their Water Resources 
Ministers.

The Premiers and I have agreed that the draft new agreement 
now be referred to the Crown law advisers of the four
Governments with a view to the early introduction of the 
necessary legislation.

In the meantime, the River Murray Commission has been
authorised to operate fully within the terms of the new agreement,
pending completion of the necessary legislative action. The
draft new agreement is the result of the first major review
of the agreement signed in 1914.

It is now proposed to expand the responsibilities of the River 
Murray Commission to include water quality in addition to the 
responsibilities it now has for water quantity in the main stem 
of the river and associated storages. At the same time, the 
agreement is being updated to make it more relevant to present 
day requirements by giving the River Murray Commission 
responsibilities in regard to other water management objectives.

Under the proposed new agreement, the River Murray Commission will 
be authorised to formulate river water quality objectives or 
standards, as appropriate, for various locations on the river. 
State authorities will be required to inform the Commission 
of all proposals under their consideration which could 
significantly affect water quality and quantity in the river and 
provide the necessary information to permit an assessment of 
their likely impact.

Obviously, the agreed water quality objectives will be of central 
relevance to such an assessment. The Commission will be empowered 
to make representations as necessary to the appropriate State 
authority on such proposals.

Further, the water distribution provisions of the new agreement 
will enable account to be taken of the quality of the inflows 
of tributaries and man-made outfalls in assessing the credits of 
the States in the Commission's water accounting procedures.

 Rules are to be drawn up for this purpose. As in every
 river system, water quality in the River Murray is the end
 product of numerous activities which take place in the catchment .
 -      in irrigation, dryland agriculture, processing industries,
 urban centres, forestry, etc. These are all State responsibilities.
 There is no intention of the River Murray Commission having a                                                                                                                                                                4111•
 regulatory function, the power of sanctions in regard to these 
 matters or the right to interfere in the States' affairs.
 The new arrangements aim at a joint assessment of all relevant 
 water and land use and other factors significantly affecting T 
 water quality. This is consistent with the development of 
 river management strategies where a river and its catchment fall 
 within the responsibility of a single Government.

 While in this regard the River Murray Commission will have only 
 the power of persuasion, its representations will be based on 
 mutually agreed water quality objectives or standards, and on 
 an ever increasing body of knowledge of the river system and its 
 problems.

 Subject to the new water quality provisions, the current water 
 sharing principles and arrangements between the three States will
 continue.                                South Australia will be entitled to 1.85 million 
 megalitres annually as measured at the South Australian border 
 in accordance with specified monthly volumes. This includes the 
 recent 23% increase made possible by the completion of
 Dartmouth Ram. The two upper States will share the balance of 
-the water resources available to the River Murray Commission, but 
 with some flexibility to cope with year-to-year pressures in 
 water demands.

 While the River Murray Water Agreement is, and will continue to remain, 
 the main policy instrument for the Commonwealth's involvement 
 with the 'three States in the management of the nation's most 
 important water resource, considerable financial assistance has 
 been provided to the three States for those salinity control and 
 drainage works in the Murray valley which fall outside the area 
 of the Commission's own responsibilities.

 These are all priority works recommended by consulting engineers, 
 Maunsell and Partners, in the plan of action they proposed in 
 their 1979 report on salinity and drainage problems in the 
 Murray valley.By the end of this financial year, we will have 
 provided about $18 million in grants to the cost of underground 
 and surface saline water drainage works on a dollar for dollar 
 basis with the three States - a total of around $36 million. 
 Together, we are well advanced in the implementation of urgent 
 works identified in the Maunsell plan of action.

   It is the view of this Government that before any decisions are 
   contemplated regarding a follow-up to the implementation of the 
   plan of action, time must be allowed for thu-accumulation and 
   assessment of vital information arising from three important 
   recent joint Commonwealth/States initiatives.

                    - 3 -

We need to know the effectiveness of the new water quality 
responsibilities now proposed for the River Murray Commission, the 
full operational impact of Dartmouth Dam and the efficiency of 
salinity control projects already completed, or under construction.

Subject to this review, we will give careful consideration to new s 
salinity control projects in accordance with priorities identified 
by the States in conjunction with the River Murray Commission._ 
This was done,recognising that to an extent, because of the measur`:s 
already undertaken, the Maunsell report is already to a degree out: 
of date.

Basic data for this purpose is already being gathered. The - 
Commission has now established a water quality monitoring network 
along the river to record salinity and other key parameters and 
consultants are being engaged shortly to develop a mathematical' 
computer model to simulate the operations of the river system, no€ 
only in terms of river flows and storage changes, but also in 
terms of river water quality. This model should be an invaluable 
instrument in the development and operation of long term strategies 
to reduce salinity in the river system to manageable
proportions, and all efforts are being made to ensure its early 
completion.

There are already signs that recent initiatives by the four 
Governments are gradually becoming effective. Water quality 
recordings by the River Murray Commission during last season's 
severe drought indicated that salinity levels were lower than 
in previous comparable dry periods. This comparative improvement has 
been attributed to the initial operations of Dartmouth Dam, now 
about two-thirds full, and the effectiveness of already completed 
salinity control works.

High river flows resulting from heavy winter rains and melting 
snow are having a beneficial flushing effect on the river system 
and adequate water supplies of good quality should be available 
next season.

It is recognised throughout the world where irrigation has 
induced salinity problems, that techniques which reduce the 
application of water surplus to plant requirements are essential 
to the success of any long-term strategy to bring the problem
under control. Amendments in May and December 1980 to the Income 
Tax Assessment Act now provide strong inventives to irrigators to 
improve their watering practices. The new provisions of the Act 
allow full deductibility of expenditures for income tax assessment 
purposes on water conservation and conveyance, salinity control 
and associate drainage works in the same year as they are incurred. 
We understand that these incentives are now starting to become 
effective. However, a better definition of the magnitude of 
the problem is required and the four Governments agreed last
Friday that a Commonwealth/States working group should review the 
extent to which irrigators are now adopting improved irrigation 
practices and assess the possible need for additional incentives.

                        - 4


It is clear that without complementary preventative measures 
at the farm level, initiatives by the four Governments in the 
fight against salinity will be impaired. The Government is 
mindful of South Australia's specific problems with River Murray 
water quality - particularly during prolonged periods of 
minimum river flow conditions. To some extent, these problems 
originate outside the State.

In relation to drinking water, there is the additional problem of 
turbidity caused by the presence of suspended soil particles 
and organic material, which reflect run-off conditions in the 
vast catchment including parts of Queensland.

Commonwealth financial assistance, already reaching $40 million; 
is enabling South Australia to build a water filtration scheme- 
for metropolitan Adelaide. Two filtration installations are 
already operational.

.The scheme, when completed, will contribute significantly to 
an improvement in the colour and taste of drinking-Water from the 
Murray integrated into Adelaide's water supplies. The River Murray 
Waters Agreement has worked to the advantage of all three States 
for over 60 years. Admittedly, managing the river for water
quantity is far less demanding than taking account also of water 
quality, having regard particularly to the Constitutional 
role of the States in practically all aspects of water and land 
use which affect river water quality.

We do not underestimate the difficulties and complex issues
which lie ahead. But with goodwill on the part of everyone concerned 
and a determination to make the proposed new River Murray Waters 
Agreement work, the long-term environmental health of the river 
and the economic well-being of the numerous urban centres and the 
great irrigation settlements in the Murray Valley can be assured.

The River Murray Commission and the agreement between the States 
is an example of the way in which many officials, or is the result 
of the way in which many officials and Ministers have over the years 
worked together to make sure that this great natural resource is 
preserved and improved for future years. There are not only many 
 thousands of farmers, many thousands of irrigators, but tens of 
 thousands of people in rural communities as well the much larger 
 number throughout South Australia of course who are dependent on 
 the River Murray and its systems. It really is one of Australia's 
 greatest natural resources. It is only going to be used in the 
 future to the best advantage of everyone concerned while the 
 Governments concerned are prepared to work in co-operation, 
 recognising their responsibilities, each to each other. I would 
 like to pay recognition to the officials of the Commonwealth and of 
 the States, the State Ministers and to other Premiers who helped to 
 bring this agreement about in a way which I believe is going to be 
 beneficial to a very large part of Australia.


                          ---000---

