<!--start metadata-->
Title: Brief review of past twelve months
Description: press statement
Date: 4/01/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                              .

PRESS STATEMENT :                             January 4th, 1960
Mn.LCOLM FRASER

                 The last twelve months have been relatively quiet 
 ones so far as Australia's internal activities have been concerned. 
 Markets for our primary products have, in general, been satisfactory 
 and the country's development has proceeded smoothly. However, in 
 the international sphere the last twelve months has seen considerable 
 changes, and it is on this that I wish to concentrate at the present
 time.
                 The position now is much better than it was twelve
 months ago when the Western powers had just been given Krushchev's 
 ultimatum about Berlin, nobody quite knew what would happen when the 
 ultimatum expired. Throughout the year things seemed to cool off a 
 little and the ultimatum seemed to fade away. Then Mr. McMillan, 
 the British Prime Minister, went to Moscow and began a period of 
 personal diplomacy. He returned from Moscow determined to press at
  every opportunity for Summit talks. Mr. Krushchev visited the 
 United States where he appeared more at home with the Bosses of 
  Industry than he was with the Bosses of the Democratic Labour Union. 
  These last gave Krushchev the toughest questioning of his United
  States tour,.
                 By this time President Eisenhower had come around
  to supporting Summit talks where before he was markedly cool to the
  idea.
                 General de Gaulle and Chancellor Adenauer from
  Germany also support Summit talks, but neither of them are in much 
  hurry. It would seem that General de Gaulle wants to explode his 
  first atomic bomb in the Sahara before the talks are held, while 
  Chancellor Adenauer is fearful that the Big Powers might agree to 
  changes concerning the future of Berlin which may lead to a reduction
  of West Germany's influence in that City.
                 It seems certain that a Summit Conference will be
  held this year. However, we should not expect too much from it 
  for although the atmosphere in International relations is much 
  better than it has been for some time no outstanding problems have
  been solved.

                               2  MIR
The question of Berlin remains, the problem of disarmament is as 
acute as it ever was. You may have seen in a Christmas time speech 
Krushchev said that Russia may disarm their army even if the West 
do not agree, he said that Russia would rely on atomic weapons and
rocket power. This is a piece of sheer propaganda because 
disarmament is not disarmament unless it includes conventional as 
well as nuclear automic weapons, and the difficulty in the past has 
always been to achieve a system of inspection which is adequate.
            Communist China is one country which has seriously 
disturbed the peace in recent months. She quelled the struggle for 
freedom in Tibet and has caused skirmishes on the Indian border 
which has led to tension between India and China. Furthermore, 
China's attitude to certain Indonesian domestic policies has led 
the Indonesians to regard Communist China with some suspicion. 
All this has caused reaction through Asian countries. Neutral 
countries in South East Asia are starting to look with alarm at 
Communist China and this must surely cause them to seek greater 
friendship with Western democracies.
             Throughout the year many world famous people visited 
Australia. Princess Alexandra carried the flag for the Royal 
Family and won the hearts of all Australians. Later in the year 
the less romantic but nevertheless important Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association held its meeting in Canberra. At this 
meeting representation of all the Commonwealth countries of every 
colour, of every race and every creed could be found. The members 
of the Association discussed their problems and their difficulties 
with friendship and understanding. At the same time Tengku Abdul 
Rahmin visited Australia and expressed warm appreciation for the 
help that this country had given Malaya in their struggle against 
communist terrorists, and secondly its best appreciation for the 
aid which Australia had given Malaya through the Colombo plan.
              Our own Prime Minister visited Europe and the 
United States earlier in the year, and just before Christmas he 
visited Indonesia and Malaya. Australians do not always realise 
the high regard that overseas countries have for this country; they
do not always realise how much that high regard is due to the 
efforts of our Prime Minister.

