<!--start metadata-->
Title: Marginal dairy farm plan, 35-hour week, Vietnamese refugees
Description: Radio talk
Date: 28/02/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK                        SUNDAY 28th FEBRUARY 1971
                                  THURSDAY 4th MARCH 1971

          This week I would like to talk with you about 
Victoria's decision to join the Commonwealth marginal
dairy farms reconstruction scheme ... ACTU plans for a 35— 
hour working week and local support for Vietnamese families.
MARGINAL DAIRY FARM PLAN
          I was pleased to learn that Victoria has agreed 
to join the proposed Commonwealth dairy farms reconstruction 
scheme.
          This scheme ensures thadairy farmers, whose 
properties have insufficient potential to become viable 
economic units may dispose of their land and improvements 
at market value.
          It will enable low income farmers to leave the 
industry if they wish to with dignity and will allow their 
small farms to be amalgamated with other nearby properties.
          Dairy industry leaders have given strong support 
for this scheme.
          The Commonwealth will provide up to $25 million 
over a four year period to enable the States to implement the
scheme.   Of the money to be used by Victoria in this scheme
50% will be a grant from the Commonwealth. The remaining 50% 
will be a loan repayable with interest at the current long- 
term bond rate.
          The Commonwealth is prepared, on the grant and loan 
basis I have mentioned, to finance those farmers who voluntarily 
leave the industry and the farmers whose properties will be 
built up.

             2

     The Commonwealth is also prepared to find all the money 
for the writing off of redundant assets on marginal farms.
     It has been estimated that throughout Australia there 
are about 24,000 dairy farms receiving a net income of less than 
$2,000 a year.
     Many of these dairy farmers are operating properties 
that cannot provide an income adequate to maintain a standard of 
living which is acceptable in the Australian community.
     In Victoria, for example, it is estimated that there are 
up to 7,500 butterfat producing farms which have a net farm income 
less than $2,000 a year.
     Through the Government's marginal dairy farm reconstruction 
scheme, any low income dairy farmer who wishes voluntarily to quit 
the industry can obtain a fair price for his farm, rather than being 
forced out by economic strangulation.
     The scheme will help dairy farmers and importantly it 
will assist the economics of those districts where low—income farmers 
are concentrated.
     As the scheme progresses, it will contribute towards a 
solution of the problem of over—supply of butterfat.
     The scheme will help solve a social problem in the rural 
sector and do so in a way that will benefit the dairy industry, the 
dairy farmer and the economy.



                         ...13

              3 —

ACTU AND 35—HOUR WEEK
     I was not so happy to learn this week that the ACTU 
 executive has launched its campaign for a 35 hour working week 
 throughout Australian industry.
     Mr. Hawke and the ACTU executive is setting out to 
 implement the ACTU Congress resolution of 1969 which called on the 
whole trade union movement to support any campaign by the ACTU 
 for "a shorter working week of a maximum of 35 hours".
     The Labour Movement's plan to introduce a 35 hour working 
week this year will be a crippling blow to all Australians.
     The rural industries, with their high costs and low returns, 
will particularly be hard hit if the Labour Movement's policy is 
 carried through.
     The type of campaign being mounted by the ACTU must be 
 resisted by primary and secondary producers, employers and the 
 Government.
     The Prime Minister has said that a shorter working week 
 in the present period of inflationary trends would be "catastrophic" 
 and I agree with him.
     My colleague, the Minister for Labour and National 
 Service estimates that a 35—hour working week would cost between 
 $1,400 million and $2,000 million a year if employers chose to 
 employ more labour to maintain production.
     Alternatively, if employers sought to maintain production 
 through increased overtime the cost increase would be between $2,100 
 million and $2,900 million.
                       ...14

                   4 —

        In terms of percentages the increases would be 
between 9% and 19%.
        But the 35—hour working week, at this time, will 
result in greatly increased costs for everyone.
        One of the worst features of such a plan is that 
the worker will be no better off with the shortened working
week. The best the worker can expect is higher money wages, 
which because of the higher prices for everything he buys, will 
buy no more.
        At this time I find it hard to think of any action 
which can do more damage to Australia and Australians.
        I believe the time for less work has not/néarly
arrived. Both the individual and the community has too many 
pressing needs, and these needs cannot be met unless they are 
worked for.

LOCAL HELP FOR VIETNAMESE
        There have been suggestions this week that 
assistance to needy Vietnamese families is to be stopped. 
I can assure you that this is not correct. Programmes of aid 
by Government and private sources are continuing and will be 
maintained at a high level.
        I commend listeners to Operation New Life, which is 
conducted by the Army and the RSL.
        This aid programme allows private individuals, 
families, church groups or service clubs to collect items 
which are shipped by the Army to Vietnam where they are

          5


distributed to families in rural villages and hamlets, to 
orphanages and aged or invalid homes.
     Details of what items are needed in Vietnam are 
held by the RSL and those listeners interested in helping 
a needy Vietnamese family should contact their local branch 
of the RSL.

