<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Wool Corporation, economic conditions, Dr Cairns
Description: Electoral radio talk
Date: 6/10/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL STATEMENT EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m.
                         Sunday, 6th October
        THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER
        ELECTORAL RADIO TALK

Last week the Government introduced legislation to provide finance for 
the Australian Wool Corporation. The Opposition parties supported the 
legislation although it had misgivings about some aspects of it.

The legislation is necessary to support the marketing activities. It 
provides government loans up to $150,000,000 at bank interest. of 112%. 
It represents a high but typical rate of interest under present condit- 
ions. The wool industry, however, has no choice but to accept what the 
government is prepared to do.

Because of the credit squeeze funds were just not available from normal 
banking sources, and growers themselves will be hard-pressed to find the 
5% levy which the government has demanded.

One of the real tragedies is that in circumstances like the present. 
when overseas demand for wool is very slack, the quantity of wool sold 
does not vary very much within certain quite wide price limits.

Buyers are concerned, however, that if they do buy at a certain price, 
their competitors won't be able to buy cheaper at a later date. That 
is the value of the floor price, but because of that circumstance, I 
would guarantee that if the floor had been kept at 300 cents a kilo 
clean, the commission would not have had to buy a single extra kilo of 
wool.

We should recall how the price was forced down from the 300 cents to 
250 cents. Last July there was an attack on the corporation by the 
Minister for Northern Development and by the member for Eden-Monaro 
Mr Wham In effect that caused overseas buyers to believe (which was 
not true) that the price had been kept up for political reasons and 
they therefore tended to withdraw from the market. It was after that 
that sales were suspended for a time and later the government supported 
prices at 250 cents,

In case anyone thinks 250 cents a pound clean sixty four's is a generous 
price, they ought to translate it into old-fashioned terms. With costs 
and charges off it is equal to about 42 cents a pound greasy. On pres- 
ent day costs with present day inflation that is not a very generous 
price.

Nobody should think that this money is a gift from the government to wool 
growers. It is lent against the security of the clip. If there are 
losses the grower contribution pays the loss and the rate of interest is 
exorbitant. There was no alternative for the industry and so the Oppos- 
ition accepted the legislation. I am, however, glad the principle of 
floor price has been accepted.

                               2.

Economic Conditions

Many people are concerned about the economic condition of this country. 
Mr Whitlam is overseas, Dr Cairns seems to charter an independant course, 
sometimes supporting, sometimes not, decisions of the government. He 
says the credit squeeze will be eased, that interest rates should come 
down, but nothing is done about it,

He says the Government action on the super-phosphate bounty was wrong 
but won't do anything about it. Who is Dr Cairns kidding

This government is going to be judged by its performance and that per- 
formance is starting to hurt tens and hundreds of thousands of Australians 
through inflation, uncertainty, loss of jobs. I only wish the government 
could make some sensible decisions. If it began to get the economy back 
on an even keel, began to establish security, the government would get 
credit for it.

I would be glad if that could happen because under present circumstances 
too many are going to be hurt.

Dr Cairns

Dr Cairns has been in the chair during It Whitlam's absence. His per- 
formance has not really impressed observers and commentators despite the 
lack of concern Mr Whitlam seems to show for Australia's current economic 
difficulties.

I would believe that a brief term as Acting Prime Minister has in fact, 
consolidated Mr Whitlam's hold over his party. Mr Whitlam might have 
been more astute than his critics gave him credit for. He may have real- 
ised that Dr Cairns would speak too much, would himself seek to woo too 
many people and thus lead himself into more contradictions than could 
be found in the thoughts of Chairman Mao Tse Tung.

