<!--start metadata-->
Title: Comments on opposition to Portland wool sales
Description: press statement
Date: 13/08/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


             PRESS STATEMENT                                                /1
                                                         August 13th,1961

                      COMMENTS ON OPPOSITION TO PORTLAND WOOL SALES
                      I don't think any of the people who have been trying to 
             arrange or support the opening of Portland as a wool selling centre 
             thought that the project would be an easy one.
                      For quite some time I have been aware of the strong 
             possibility that the brokers and the buyers would do everything they 
             could to prevent the sales being a success, and only in this last 
             week I received a letter from the Manager of Portland Woolbrokers, 
             together with a copy of a letter written by the Chairman of the 
             National Council of Woolselling Brokers.
                      This letter from the Chairman of the National Council made 
             it quite plain that the brokers would oppose sales at Portland despite 
             the wishes of a large number of growers in Western Victoria. This 
             letter was also the final refusal of the Portland Wool Brokers' 
             request to be allotted sale dates within the orderly arrangement of
             sales throughout Australia. This means, of course, that Portland 
•            Wool Brokers have to set their own dates, avoiding as far as 
             possible conflict with other major sales. This decision by the 
             Brokers does not mean that sales cannot be held, it only means that 
             the brokers are opposing sales at Portland.
                      The Australian Council of Woolbuyers are also opposing 
             wool sales at Portland, although they have not gone to the length 
             that they did in New South Wales where they tried to prohibit their 
             individual members attending sales at Goulburh.
                      One paragraph in a letter I have seen from the Chairman 
             of the National Council of Woolbuyers is quite extraordinary. The 
             paragraph I am referring to reads like this;-
                       'The responsibility and perogative as it affects the 
             opening of new markets on behalf of the Australian wool buying Trade 
•            is entirely the concern of the Australian Council of Woolbuyers."
                       This is a fantastic claim, implying that only the buyers' 
             interests are to be served, and ignoring completely the ashes of
             many growers.  It is a position that cannot be let stand as it is.
                        It is my belief that this opposition on behalf of brokers 
             and buyers, which has now come to light, will do much to strengthen 
             the determination of growers in Western Victoria to make the sales 
             a success, as I believe they will be.
                        There are several things that can be done that will help 
             the sales being a success and which may do much to lessen the
             brokers' and the buyers' resistance to sales at Portland. The 
             most important matter is, of course, to have a large quantity of 
             good wool offering for sale. If this is so, no matter what the 
             brokers or what the buyers officially do, sufficient individual 
             buyers would most certainly go along to buy the wool.
                         I hope all producer organizations will also lend their 
             support to sales at Portland, thus giving some State wide support 
             for a move that is certainly in the interest of decentralization 
             of Victoria, and is, indeed, in the national interest of Australia.

                                         2
              I would hope that individual members of all woolgrowing organizations 
              will do what they can to bring pressure to bear on the brokers and
              the buyers in this regard. It is worth noting that members of 
              woolgrowing organizations in one way or another provide the bulk
              of the income for the brokers. Therefore, it is largely in the 
              hands of individual woolgrowers as to how much pressure they can 
              bring to bear.
                        Evidence can be given to the wool marketing Committee of 
              Enquiry regarding action of the brokers and the buyers.
                        I have already brough the actions of the brokers and the 
              buyers to the notice of the Attorney-General, Sir Garfield Barwick,
              and of the State Authorities. It is well known that the 
              Commonwealth and the States are together examining possible
              Restrictive Trade Practices legislation. The Commonwealth has been 
              engaged in this field for some time, but because of the division of 
              powers it is felt that complementary legislation in both the 
              Commonwealth and the States would be necessary for an effective law. 
              If the brokers and the buyers take their opposition further they 
•             may well run foul of enquiries that are being made in this field.
                         Obviously, brokers will oppose sales at Portland because 
              they say that existing facilities are adequate to meet present 
              requirements and that therefore any extension of sales is undesirable. 
              The buyers also take this view. These two bodies behave as though 
              they are the sole arbiters as to whether or not a sale should be 
              held in a certain place, and they appear to take little regard of 
              the wishes of growers or of the fact that sales at Portland would 
              categorically reduce transport costs to many growers, and would be 
              a most important move in effective decentralization throughout 
              Victoria.
                           Further, an additional reason the brokers do not
•             mention which would inspire them to oppose sales at Portland is the 
              fact that Portland Wool Brokers is an outside Company so far as the 
              National Council of Wool Brokers is concerned, and those who are 
              already in the National Council would object to a new Company being 
              formed that would get some share of the business.
                            The brokers have clearly acted with regard to their 
              own particular business interests, and some may therefore insist 
              their action is understandable. However, that does not make it right. 
              In the national interest it is wrong, and the national interest must 
              prevail.
                             I am doing what I can on the political side to 
              overcome this opposition to sales at Portland, but this is a fight 
              in which everyone in Western Victoria must be concerned, especially 
              the woolgrowers who, alone, in the last resort, can make sales a 
              success by sending some of their wool to be sold at Portland. It 
              is essential for Portland's future development that their sales be 
              successful. If the sales are a success other things will follow at 
              Portland which also will be of benefit to all the people of Western 
              Victoria and south-east of South Australia.

