<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Description: radio talk
Date: c1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                        During the week some attention was given in Parliament 
to the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, whose task it
is to protect the national security of Australia                                           the body 
charged with the task of countering espionage and subversion:
 .RfiA....11111.0üJUUnir"r"! • poigii111~Ia_YIJU                1111"1"iW
                        The rare exchange on the organisation -- generally known
as "Asio" -- was brought about by a question by Dr. J.F. Cairns, the
Labour member for Yarra, who claimed to have knowledge that the
Security Organisation had a record of a conversation between himself
and another person, a national serviceman. In the ensuing reply by
the Attorney-General, Mr. Bowen, and in further debate some interesting
points emerged about the powers and status of the Organisation, which
I would like to discuss in this talk tonight.
                        Mr. Bowen -- the Minister responsible for "Asio" --
denied that the Security Service spied or eavesdropped on the member
for Yarra in the circumstances that he had alleged. In doing this,
the Attorney-General departed to some extent from a practice that had
been observed throughout the 19'-yearihistory of the Organisation --
that is, a refusal to publicly discuss the operations of the Organisation,
and a refusal to deal in detail with security questions by either
confirming or denying them.
                        The point here, of course, is that even a flat denial
of some allegation or other about the operations of "Asio" can emerge
as a confirmation of some aspect of security techniques or practices.
                        Let me deal with this point first,
                                                                ion com



                        When the security service originated in early 1949 the 
then Prime Minister had some interesting things to say about the 
confidential nature of, the security service activities, which has
remained avt—ittw. 1n1,10 AAA-4- OA                to this day.
                        In 1949 the then Prime Minister, answering a question 
about the scope of the service, said -- "I am certain that no gaps 
will be left in our security measures. As the honourable member knows, 
it is not usual to discuss the detailed activities of a security 
service. Much of the value of such a service lies in the fact that 
it works quietly. Members of the Organisation should not be unduly 
prominent at cocktail parties, but should devote themselves to the 
tasks allotted to them".
                        The author of those words was Mr. Ben Chifley, the 
Labour Prime Minister of Australia at that time. So the "security" 
of the security service itself was laid down, clearly and unequivocally, 
by a Labour Prime Minister.
                                        1, up l(                                 c./ e
                                                                     ~~
                                                         / ~                                       7 ~{Ctr41-(1

   r
                                              —2—




                In partially departing this week from the long—established practice of 

         neither confirming or denying questions about security, the Attorney—General 

         made it clear he did so in very special circumstances, and that his action was

         not to be regarded as a precedent.

                I will recall to your minds at this point that the allegations had received 

         wide publicity and had been made at a high level — by Dr. Cairns, who recently 

         failed by only a few votes in the ballot for leadership of his party. So 

         there was some measure of public disquiet, and the Attorney—General went on to 

         deny that the telephone of the member for Yarra had been tapped by the security 

         service. Nor had he as Attorney—General received a request from the security 

         organisation to tap the telephone of any member of the Parliamgent.

                Some comments made on the scope of security, and some questions and views 

         put in Parliament, suggest that special categories of people should be declr edQ        v-'.~

         as being ' mune om the operations of security. mr=—~s#n`s tha 

         politicians be immune from security surveillances Why? Why should politicans 

         be exempt, any more than say, mpmbersto,g the ju 'ciary m 'stra es4,, ministers

         of religion, doctors, kl i                      Security                  ii any case

         arises only under the most ser s of irc •s :aces, and Io not t nk                    t ~~
                                                                                      Aan
rr~                             -                 •   • .                            n a       (.4~

         democracy like Australia, security operates under the most rigid of controls              "-11).

         to prevent any misuse of powers. There is a Director—General, a man of the 

         highest integrity, and political responsibility rests with the Attorney—General

         and continues on t• t'z- Pri e Minister hi el 
                                                                                 ' L-C) f)
              14—C...                                      .   .         -    g                   -
         e-v&T puli4 val'       rHh       -'            that the existence of a service to

         protect national security is necessary. Because they deal in secrets, their 

         operations are secret. Little light is ever let into the precise activities 

         of the security service of any country. Now and again the veil lifts a 

         little and the average citizen gets a glimpse into the 'quiet work' — as it 

         was put by Mr Chifley — of a security organisation.

                You will recall the case of the Soviet diplomat Ivan Skripov, expelled 

         by the Australian Government in February, 1963, for espionage. The 

         Attorney—General at the time issued a detailed press statement, mentioning 

         the astute work of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation in 

         uncovering espionage activities connected with the affair. The Government 

         documented its case with a damning array of pictorial and other material, 

         which it made available to the press.

                The episode, which was something of a cause celebre as spy dramas go, 

         served to indicate the unrelenting attempts of Soviet intelligence to 

         penetrate Western institutions in attempts to gain official secret

         information. It served as a warning that the 'legal apparatus' of a

         foreign mission — the Russian embassy — was the source of illegal espionage 

         operations; as it had been proved to be the case in other countries at 

         other times.

              3.


       The functions of the Australian Security Intelligence 
Organisation are not secret. They are laid down in the Act, from which 
I will quote to give an indication of the scope of the organisation's 
work.
       The Organisation is to "obtain, correlate and evaluate 
intelligence relevant to security, and, at the discretion of the 
Director-General, to communicate any such intelligence to such persons, 
and in such manner as the Director-General considers to be in the 
interests of security.
       The Organisation is also to "advise Ministers, where the 
Director-General is satisfied that it is necessary or desirable to 
do so, in respect of matters relevant to security, in so far as those 
matters relate to departments of state administered by them or to 
authorities of the Commonwealth established by or under acts administered 
by them".

       The powers of the Organisation relating to the
interception of telephone conversations were laid down in the Telephonic 
Communications (Interception) Act of 1960 -- an Act to prohibit phone- 
tapping except where specially authorised in the interests of the 
nation's security.
       Clear safeguards were written into this measure to ensure 
that the strictest of controls was maintained on use of the powers 
conferred. For a start, stiff penalties were laid down to be inflicted 
on any person convicted of illegal phone tapping. Before the security 
organisation can act to listen in to a phone call, it has to provide 
detailed reasons to the highest of authorities. The Director-General 
of Security has to make a request to the Attorney-General. The 
Attorney-General has to feel certain that the case involves activities 
prejudicial to the security of the Commonwealth -- or reasonable 
suspicion of this. The Attorney-General has to feel satisfied that 
tapping the phone concerned would, or be likely to, assist the
Security Organisation in obtaining intelligence relevant to the interests 
of security.
       The Director-General, when he makes a request to the 
Attorney-General, must also supply detailed reasons, closely specifying 
the facts and all grounds on which he considers it necessary to tap 
the telephone service involved.

                    -4-

    Espionage has been presented in a decidedly, colourful role by the 
spate of films, to euissi_on dramas and books on spies and counter-spies.
    But n1040.ft fancy gives way to fact, as newspaper headlines announce 
that another espionage agent has been caught, or uncovered, or another
diplomat has been expelled «---Q o.
    Behind these occasional lifts in the curtain is a lot of hard, 
painstaking and probably often dull routine work by security services.
    It has been pointed out that it must be much easier for the Communist 
countries to do their spying, their intelligence surveillance. Like 
anyone else they are able to read the Western newspapers which report 
freely in the atmosphere of their democracies, presenting facts for 
legitimate public consumption.
    But the newspapers in Communist countries, containing none of the 
deep press probing desirable in a democracy, must be rather barren fields 
for Western security services.

