<!--start metadata-->
Title: Indonesia - Netherlands
Description: press statement
Date: 16/09/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  PRESS STATEMENT:

  MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                  September 16th,1962

                        "INDONESIA - NETHERLANDS"

             A few days ago Indonesia and Holland came to an agreement over 
  West New Guinea. This agreement should put an end to an argument that is 
  more than ten years old. Under the agreement control of West New Guinea 
  will be handed over to U.N. within the next few weeks. On 1st January of 
  next year the Indonesian flag will be raised alongside the U.N. flag and the 
  U.N. authorities will have the power to hand West New Guinea over to 
  Indonesian administrative control any time after 1st May,1963. Before 7 
  years have ended the people of West New Guinea must be given an opportunity 
  to decide their own future. The plebiscite that will be held will be 
  conducted under U.N. auspices; if the agreements that have been signed by 
  both the Netherlands and the Indonesians are kept to the full the vote should
  be a fair one.

             These changes, brought about as a result of constant Indonesian 
  pressure and as a result of diplomatic manoeuvres by the U.N. sponsored 
  largely by the United States, give Australia a land boundary with an Asian 
  power for the first time in history. There are many Australians who have 
  felt anxious about the course of the negotiations and about the increased 
 military pressures which have been used by the Indonesians. It has been 
 fairly common to hear Australians say, after West New Guinea they will want 
 East New Guinea and that will bring us into direct contact and conflict with 
 Indonesia. Although there is no cause for complacency in Australia about 
 the outcome of the dispute we must realise that no other result was possible 
 and we therefore must learn to live with it and do everything we can to 
 create-a friendly and trustworthy relationship with Indonesia. We can only 
 do this if we can understand the Indonesian motives of the last dozen years.

            Indonesia is a nation of many different islands; the people of 
 Indonesia do not belong to one race, some of them are nearly black while 
 others are nearly as pale as we are. They are not unified by race, by 
 religion or by colour. They are not unified by belonging to one land mass. 
 The many islands in the Indonesian nation create administrative difficulties 
 which even we in our large continent find it difficult to understand.

            There is, however, one unifying force in the Indonesian nation, 
 and it is a powerful one. Centuries ago the Netherlands carved out an 
 empire in our near north. Indonesia is heir to that empire. This is the 
unifying factor. The Indonesian Government at Djakarta claimed that anything 
 that used to belong to the Dutch should belong to Indonesia. While the 
Dutch remained in West New Guinea the Indonesians felt cheated and constantly 
reminded of their colonial past. It is worth noting that when Holland signed 
away the sovereignty to the major part of her empire in 1949, West New Guinea
was specifically excluded. However, there was a clause attached to the 
agreement signed at that time which said that negotiations for the transfer 
of West New Guinea should take place between Holland sand Indonesia within a 
year. Although these negotiations did take place in part they led only to a 
worsening of relations between Holland and her former colony which was then
the new Indonesia.

            This was because the Indonesians went to the discussions believing 
that their purpose was to decide the method of transfer of West New Guinea 
to Indonesia. However, at the Conference table they found that the Dutch 
had quite a different view. The Dutch did not admit that West New Guinea 
should inevitably be passed over to Indonesia. This was the basis of the 
dispute which persisted for so long. The Dutch are now leaving West New 
Guinea and diplomatic relations which had for a long time been broken off, 
have been resumed between Indonesia and Holland. The Indonesian nation as 
heir to the former Dutch Empire is now complete.



                                                              /2.

•


                                         -  2    /IM


                      The coming years will be the deciding time in Indonesia. In
      the past their own economic troubles have been pushed to the background by
      their arguments with the Dutch.    All political parties in Indonesia have 
      jumped on the nationalistic bandwagon; gaining possession of West New Guinea 
      has been the objective of Indonesia for a very long time. They now have 
      this objective.

                      There are some people who believe that the Indonesians will 
      need to find some other external diversion so that they can distract the
      average Indonesian mind from his own economic difficulties.    If the Indo- 
      nesians are unable to master their economic difficulties, and if they look to 
      external diversions to distract the attention of their own people it will be 
      a sad day indeed for the history of the people to our north, with implications 
      that could involve the whole of S.E. Asia.

                      The Minister for Territories has recently said that we would
      fight for East New Guinea, and that we would expect help from our Allies as 
      we would expect help if Australia proper were attacked.

                      However, there is no anology between East and West New Guinea.
      The attitude of the Americans and of the British would be quite different if
      any nation tried to attack East New Guinea.    There is, however, a very good 
      chance that Indonesia will not look for external diversions but will now
      concentrate on her own domestic troubles.    The army vote which was carried 
      largely because of the West New Guinea argument has been over 50% of their total 
      Budget. If this is reduced they can devote some resources to solving their 
      own problems and we must hope that they will do this and encourage them to do 
      so and help them when we can through such Organizations as the Colombo Plan.

                      I would like to say something to those who think that some
      other solution should have been found.     If Indonesia did not obtain West 
      New Guinea, silo would clearly have gone to war with Holland because of the 
      historic argument which I have mentioned. There are a great number of Russian 
      technicians in Indonesia who are probably fighter or bomber pilots. As I 
      understand it, it was in the interests of the Russians and the Communists to 
      have Indonesia reject the negotiations and go to war. Iî Indonesia had gone 
      to war, nations other than Indonesia and Holland would have been involved. 
      Russia would have provided military equipment and volunteers in the guixe of 
      technicians. But there could only have been one outcome from such a war 
      in terms of Indonesia's own political history. She would have gone Communist 
      without any shade of doubt. If she had won, she would have won with the help 
      of Russia. The Communists in Indonesia would have been in such a position of 
      influence and power that they would have come to rule the country. If Indonesia 
      had lost the war she would still have gone Communist because her economy would 
      have been completely destroyed and the misery and poverty that would have 
      resulted from the defeat would have created the perfect conditions for a complete 
      Communist takeover. While even now there is a strong Communist party in Indonesia 
      there are also men in Indonesia dedicated to seeing that she does not become
      Communist.    The recent settlement will strengthen the hands of these people. 
      If Indonesia did go Communist a severe blow would be struck at our own security. 
      You have only to look at a map to see how Indonesia, and the Islands under
      her control stretch right across our usual air routes to Asia and to Europe.

                      The solution reached was, I believe, the only possible answer 
      to a problem that did not have an ideal solution.

