<!--start metadata-->
Title: Road accidents, wheat market
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 21/11/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          RADIO TALK                                     3HA Sunday Nov. 21
                                                         3YBf0110. Nov. ,,, r 
                                                         3LK Mond. Nov. 22


          Hello Ladies and Gentlemen,

           I am continually disturbed to read in the newspapers
          from towns in +he                          ( Western Victoria      ` 
          91,A• )reports of-tragic fatal road accidents.
          Lately there seems to be more than    u         Some of these
          accidents have involved young people, others well-known 
          and respected members of the community.
•
          My colleague, the Minister for Shipping and Transport
          Mr Peter Nixon, whose portfolio includes aspects of road 
          safety, recently described traffic accidents as one of
          our most pressing s               c problems.

          Statistics prepared by his department show that the 
          greatest killer of Australian males under the age of
          35 is road accidents. It is the third most important 
          cause of mortality in all age groups. In addition alcohol 
          is present in more than one third of all fatal accidents.

          These statistics also indicate quite strongly that wearing 
          of seat belts both reduces traffic fatalities, and the 
          more crippling in-auries, such as spine damage, associated 
          with accidents.

          This is born oat in Victoria, where up to ag'
                the end of October there had been 770 fatalities
          this year. In the same 10 months last year,,Yswhen wearing
          of seat belts was not compulsory, there were 919 fatalities.

          This reduction in Victoria accounts almost completely for 
          the drop in the national total. 4 To the end of October 
          this year , 2dritif7 3005 people had lost their lives on the 
          roads, compared to 3185 last year.

a

                                    What can b done to halt this terrible     r                                                                                       situation.
                                    The                                                    Government has recently established

                                    a Commonwea th Expert Group which draws together

                                    a wide section of highly experienced and qualified v---
                                    people covering p*sychology, medicine, law, road 

                                    planning, and driving. The group includes Australia's 

                                    World Champion driver Jack Brabham.



                                    They are beginning a comprehensive review of more than 
                                    25 releve t topics on road safety in Australia, ,t-JaQ

                                                                                                             It i5 hoped that out of this

                                    review will cote far reaching and effective measures 14:-. 

                                    or reducing the road toll.


                                    In addition the Australian Transport Advisory Council, 

                                    which comprises the Minister for Shipping and Transport, 

                                    and the State Ministers have been active in stepping 

                                    up standards which car manufacturers must meet.



                                    Nine new rules have recently come into force covering 

                                    such things as brake hoses, safety rim, door latches 

                                    and steering columns.



                                    At the beginning of next year a further seven become 

                                    effective covering reversing light5, automatic transmission 

                                    controls, mirror and head restraints.

 •
                                    Further standards are currently under review and 

                                    already some far-reaching ones have been established 

                                    to come into force after 1976.



                                    I can only hope that the emphasis in car buying and 

                                    car driving will rapidly swing frviw.petimewirmo,poe47-mrit

                                    c"Mirert                                                    to safety, and practicability.

                                    The cost                            in terms of human suffering of the present 

                                    situation is already far to high.

                                               Broadcast ...3

                                                        .. 6     6 5 0 c ~S
                                                              --  ~ ~

           I would like to turn now to the wheat             __, something

           which is uppermost in the minds of many farmers at this 

           time of the year.



           The Australian Vheat Board has some good news to report. 

           It Inow complet a record selling year, having

           so far disposed of qa total of 388 million bushells of 
           wheat, 4-442_        peg /e fret n7Li717      x



           This is made up of export sales of 312 million bushells,

           15 million bushells exports as flour and other derivatives, 

           and 61 million bushells sold on the local market.


110        The important thing about the export sales is the comparatively
           small quantity which was bought by Communist Chinag Mrs jeary
           Predictions that wttitt the p                   ed refusal

           of China to buy our wheat would result in enormous carry-overs

           have just not come true. This is a particular tribute to

           the wheat board which has managed to dispose of our

           crop to the United Arab Republic, Britain, Europe, span,

           and other countries to such an extent that the carryover

           at the present time is just 130 million bushells, a very

           satisfactory position.



           At the same time quotas for this year were set at a total
           of 339 million bushells, however poor x           season 

           in view South Wales and Queensland ha e resulted in an 

           expected delivery of only 270 million bushells. If good 

           sales result next year we may be faced with a surplus

           even less than      t we would like , a quantity -?rw'lrd 

           the Australian Wheat Growers Federation sets at about 150 

           million bushells.



           There is of course a possibility now that wheat quotas 

           for next year may be increased, however whether this is 

           possible will append on the Federations meeting in 

           December when quotas will be set. In any event, the 'Wheat 

           Industry at least`is in a sound position at the present time.

                                                                                    ~



                                                                            ^

