<!--start metadata-->
Title: Foreign affairs
Description: press statement
Date: 21/08/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


• PRBSS STATIVENTs       August 21st, 19GU

       1960 has been an eventful year, particularly in the international
  field. It started off with visits between Heads of Nations which led up
  to the eventual fiasco of the Summit Conference at Paris. At this time,
  relations between the Great Powers seem to have become more bitter and.
  the cold war - so-called - seems to have become colder.
       The common man's hopes of some easing in world tensions have
  been, for the present at any rate, completely unfounded.
       Since the Summit Conference, the Russians have not actually
  acted tougher but they have most certainly spoken tougher, and recent
  events in Cuba and in what was the Belgian Congo, have underlined this.
  So far as Cuba was concerned, it was a Russian barter agreement to barter
  sugar for crude oil which sparked off the difficulty with the Americans.
  All of Cuba's refineries are owned by various American Companies, and
  these refineries all bave access to their own crude oil. Therefore,
  there is no reason why they should refine Russian crude oil. After the
  barter agreement with the revolutionary Cuban Leader, the Companies
  concerned, quite rightly and understandably, refused to refine the oil.
  They probably had a pretty good idea that this would lead to their take-
  over by the revolutionary Cuban Government, but the Companies were
  prepared for this and clearly felt that they were acting on a matter of
  principle which they could not forego.
       The issues in the Belgian Congo have been more important and
  more fundamental. One of the chief problems in the Congo was that, in
  the early days of occupation, the Belgians did little but exploit the
  area for their own benefit. Unlike the British in particular, they did
  little or nothing to build up a solid corps of native administrators
  and of native public servants which would be essential if the country
  were to obtain proper independence and self-government. Then, when
  the Belgians finally saw the writing on the wall and realised that the
  climate of world opinion would not make it possible for them to maintain .
  their position in the Congo they made a quick about face and abdicated 
  their responsibilities. By this I mean they set target dates for full 
  independence for the Congo while, at the same time, they had not done 
  anything like enough to make sure that the Congo would remain united and 
  to make sure that the Congo would be served by an efficient and patriotic

band of native public servants.
          Sufficient Africans had not been trained far theses tasks, 
therefore the maintenance of order and of government in the Congo was 
going to depend upon many Belgians who would have had to remain behind 
in public jobs of one kind or another.
          Since Independence lay, the Prime Ministear° of th.e Congo, fir. 
Lumumba, has shown himself unable to keep order or to prevent rioting.
He has been unable to prevent other Leaders trying to break away from the 
Congo and to prevent them establishing independent States. pit the same 
time, he has been unable to prevent a violent wave of anti—Be" an
feeling which has persuaded the remaining Belgians that they must get 
out of the country as quickly as possible, thus bringing about the virtual 
breakdown of many government services.
          The matter became difficult anddangerous because the Belgian 
Government, again quite rightly, kept saying that its troops would remain 
in the Congo until all the Belgians had been evacuated, since there were 
some grounds for f earing for the safety of Belgian civilians. Prime 
Minister Lumumba was demanding the evacuation of Belgian troops 
immediately, and was implying that he may well call in Russian troops 
to help him if they did not leave. The Russians did not help the 
situation by offering to supply troops to the Congo, nor did they help 
the situation by sending a shipload of arms to some of the rebel elemre 
in the Congo under the guise of being a gift from Poland which, in real yt
meant being a gift from Russia
          It was in this arena that the United Nations had to act to try 
and restore law and order in the Congo, to try and restore unity to the 
Congo and, at the same time, to prevent Central Africa becoming a battle— 
ground between the Comm nists and the Democratic Powers. DTr.Hammarskjold, 
the General Secretary of the United Nations, has certainly to be praised 
for what looks like being an almost complete United Nations victory. 
The United Nations troops from several countries, chiefly Africans, 
of all occupied the major portions of the Congo and recently the secretary 
General himself has overcome 'further difficulties to a peaceful solution 
of the problem by persuading the breakaway Prime Minister of Katanga 
Province to allow United Nations troops to enter. Until these troops 
could enter, it was impossible for the Belgians to withdraw their armed
forces.

                3
   All thie has been done and the danger of Russian intervention
in an open form has been avoided. At the care time, the United Nations
is organising corps of specialists, experts and technicians to enter
the Congo to restore public services that are so badly needed, and
which threatened to break down when Belgian civilians left or were
forced from the country.
   In the matter of the Congo, the Secretary General, Mr. Hammarskjold
has acted with tact and with firmness. He was first of all able to get
a resolution through the Security Council that enabled United Nations
troops to enter the Congo. To prevent any cry from the Russians or
from the rest of Africa that this was an Imperialist move he had the
tact to use coloured United Nations troops chiefly from Ghana and
Guinea. Then, when it became necessary also to occupy Katanga, and
when this could have so easily involved the use of force, he was able
to manage things so diplomatically and so effectively so far as the
people of the Congo were concerned that United Nations troop e have
entered 'Want Province without a shot being fired.
   411 this has made it possible for a peaceful solution to a
problem that could have set the whole of Africa aflame. It has done
much to raise the prestige of the United Nations,

