<!--start metadata-->
Title: Press statement
Description: press statement
Date: 9/09/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT: 

 MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                      September 9th,1962


              Last week, Canberra feted the young King and Queen of Thai- 
 land. During their visit to the Capital, King Bhumibol and Queen Sirikit 
 won the affection and respect of everyone who met them. The King was 
 clearly dedicated to the service of his own people. His position is a 
 most difficult one and one which must give him constant cause for anxiety.

              His country is ringed by Laos on the north and east, and by 
 Cambodia on the south-east and by Burma on the west. Up until a short 
 time ago he had no Communist neighbours. Now, however, Laos is being 
 governed by a coalition which contains neutralists, right wing elements
 and Communists.   There is a strong possibility that the whole of Laos will 
 go Communist. No country in the world has,so far, been ruled by a Govern- 
 ment which contains a large number of Communists without that country coming 
 under complete Communist domination. There is no reason why Laos should be 
 an exception to this unhappy pattern and many reasons why it should conform
 to the rule.  If this happens, Thailand will have a long border adjacent
 to a Communist country.  In every country of South East Asia which is 
 adjacent to a Communist country, guerilla activities have been begun, such 
 as in South Vietnam, where almost the whole country is subject to guerilla 
 activity of the most serious kind.

              Communist guerillas, under these circumstances, can cross the 
 border, make a raid, and then return o safety to the Communist country. 
 Since the people very often look alike, they can pose as peasants of the 
 country that they are about to raid, and this again makes detection much 
 more difficult.

             However, these are not necessarily the only dangers that face 
 the King of Thailand. He was a younger son and, normally would not have 
 come to the Throne, but several years ago, his elder brother, the former 
 King, was shot while he slept. His body was discovered on the following 
morning but his murderer was never found.

             Although Thailand is not a democracy in the true Australian 
sense, it has a long tradition of freedom. More than 700 years ago, an 
ancestor of the present King placed a gong outside his Palace. Any 
subject who had a grievance could go and ring on the gong and the King 
would hear the case. In more recent times, Thailand has had a Parliament, 
although this Parliament has not been particularly active. The Thai 
Ambassador who came to visit several Apex branches in Wannon two or three 
years ago said that this was because the Thai people were happy with the 
way they were ruled by their King and did not really believe that politicians 
were necessary, Sometimes I almost feel that there are some Australians 
who think the same way, but then, if you got rid of the politicians here, 
you would have to find something to replace them and that may not be so easy.

             2,000 years ago, the Thai people fled from China to their
present country.   They fled from China because they did not like being
ruled by the warlords of China. They wished to be free,. In fact, "Thai" 
means free, so the name of their country translated into English would read 
"freeland" .

             The Thai Government and people next to Malaya are, perhaps, the 
most bitterly anti-Communist in South East Asia and this is not just because
of Communism.  It is also because of this long tradition of freedom and 
because of the fact that they established themselves in their present county: 
to escape Chinese domination. They have no more wish to be ruled by the 
Chinese communists than they had to be ruled by the Chinese warlords 2,000 
years ago.



                                                                   /2.

                                2


            During the banquet given by the Government of Australia to honour 
the King and Queen of Thailand, the King spoke in good English and without 
notes, of the traditions of his country. He pointed out a fact which I 
don't think any Australian denies, that Thailand is really an outpost in the
defence of Australia.  The more countries that are free of Communist 
influence to our north the greater is our own security. The greater the 
Communist subversion, the more countries that fall under Communist domination, 
the greater is our own danger. This has been well recognised over many
years by the Australian Government. Thailand and Australia together with 
other countries, are linked together in the South East Asia Treaty Organization. 
The visit of the King and Queen should do much to cement the friendships between 
the two countries.

            Queen Sirikit was born in Thailand and has been much better 
educated than most people of any country. She went to school in Switzerland, 
in Paris and in London and the schools she attended were the best in those 
three countries. Queen Sirikit had a warm and pleasing personality. While 
she might have attracted greated newspaper space than her husband because of 
her very obvious glamour, it should not be thought that the King was in any 
way a retiring person. He is a man of great determination and of great 
strength of character

           Part of the training of the Thai Kings involves being schooled 
for the priesthood, and while the present King was undergoing this schooling, 
Queen Sirikit acted as his Regent.

           The visit of the King and Queen should bring home to Australians 
that we are a part of South East Asia and must live with South East Asia. 
I wish more Australians when they go for holidays abroad could perhaps
travel to the countries of South East Asia and learn something of the habits 
and customs of the people, This rarely happens because, for obvious historic 
reasons, when people go abroad they want to visit the United Kingdom and 
Europe.

           During the banquet, the Prime Minister supported by Mr. Whitlam, 
proposed the Toast of the King and Queen of Thailand, and later, King
Bhumibol proposed the Toast to Queen Elizabeth. At the end of his speech 
he gave a gold replica of the Royal Thai barge, not to Mr. Menzies or to 
Mr. Whitlam but to the Australian Parliament. The Prime Minister suggested 
that this barge should stand in King's H all as a perpetual reminder of the 
King's visit.

