<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry, public service, Gough Whitlam, Doug Anthony
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 17/09/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    3HA - Sunday, 17 September 
                    3YB - Thursday, 21 September 
    BROADCAST       3ZK - Wednesday, 20 September



        With every passing day the Wool Industry grows
    stronger.


        I wish I could have said the same thing this time 
    last year but, as you all know, the situation then was an 
    unpleasant one. It was a time of desperately low wool prices 
    when only the activities of the Australian Wool Commission 
    saved the vital Australian industry from probable collapse.


        It was a time when the Commonwealth Government 
•   faced the prospect of an outlay of more than $200 million 
    had wool prices not improved during the last financial year.


        It was a time of great concern for us all. Today 
    prices are stronger and I believe the Commonwealth can claim 
    a substantial part of the credit for the improvement.


        All of us are now looking ahead to the future. We 
    are looking expectantly to the Australian Wool Marketing 
    Corporation, the proposed amalgamation of the Australian 
    Wool Board and Wool Commission, and to the recommendations 
    it will put before the Federal Government for wool marketing 
•   reform including acquisition.

        In our expectancy for the future we should not over- 
    look the success of the past, especially the immediate past. 
    I was reminded of this only two or three weeks ago when the 
    Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair, commended the 
    efforts of the Australian Wool Commission.


        He said that the reserve pricing activities of the 
    Australian Wool Commission had resulted in a gain of $70 million 
    to the wool industry, a gain which was a significant factor 
    in the revival of the industry's economic position.



                            .../2

                   2




          Complementing the gain has been the disposal, at 
     a significant profit, of the large proportion of the stocks 
     built up by the Commission in the early months of the past 
     wool selling season.


          Mr Sinclair paid high tribute to the Commission's 
     Chairman, Mr Vines, the Commission's members, the General 
     Manager of the Commission, Mr Vawser, and his staff, particularly 
     in the face of criticisms which they sometimes had levelled 
     at them.


          I join Mr Sinclair in that tribute. I think the 
     final seal of approval on the Commission's activities was the 
~    evidence in its Annual Report to Parliament showing that the 
     Commission had registered a profit of $10.39 million.


          I believe the future of the wool industry will be 
     far more stable and ordered, if not spectacular in profit 
     making of the kind we knew 20 years ago. But I also believe 
     that in the years ahead, the work of the Australian Wool 
     Commission in the crisis from which we have only recently 
     emerged will be more and more appreciated and the Government's 
     firm action at that time fully justified.


          Before concluding, I want to refer to two statements 
•    by Mr Whitlam in the last week or two, statements which I feel 
     he should regret very much.


          On television in Melbourne, Mr Whitlam said a Labor 
     Government would change the law to allow senior public servants 
     the right to speak openly.


          First, I believe practically all responsible public 
     servants would oppose such a development, and for very good 
     reasons. Under our system, Ministers rely heavily on advice 
     from senior departmental officers, advice given frankly and 
     within the traditional framework of trust and privacy of 
     communication which exists between public servants and political 
     heads. The decision and the accountability for that decision
     are the Minister's, not the public servant's.



                                .../3

               _3

        If Mr Whitlam had his way the entire system would 
    collapse. The confidence between Minister and public servant 
    would be shattered.

        To avoid the prospect of public conflict with their 
    Minister on occasions when they disagreed with him, departmental 
    officers would be tempted to offer advice which they knew he 
    would want to hear. At the same time, new Ministers might be 
    inclined to change senior staff because their publicly known 
    views under previous Ministers were at variance with theirs. 
    The upheaval in the public service would be enormous, the 
    pressure on individual departmental officers intolerable and 
•   the whole public service system threatened.
        Senior Public Servants in particular need to be in 
    a position in which their advice will be respected not only 
    by different Ministers but by Ministers from different 
    governments. If they have been involved in public controversy, 
    that situation is difficult to maintain.

        Finally, I refer to Mr Whitlam's remark concerning 
    the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Anthony, made on the same TV 
    programme.

        Tackled over his commitment to revalue upwards the 
    Australian dollar thereby reducing every Australian farmer's 
    income through lost export earnings, Mr Whitlam turned on 
    Mr Anthony, describing him as the poorest educated man holding 
    senior political office Federally.

        Mr Whitlam's remark is at best in bad taste.
    Mr Anthony, a farmer, is a diplomate from the Queensland 
    Agricultural College, Gatton. But more than that, Mr Anthony's 
    contributions to the welfare and good government of Australia 
    in several portfolios and now as deputy Prime Minister and 
    Minister for Trade and Industry are very substantial indeed.

        He is a first class Minister, a first class leader 
    of the Country Party.


                            .../4

        Mr Whitlam's remarks are certainly not in the best 
    Labor traditions. I wonder what he would have thought of
    Ben Chifley, the engine driver who became a great Prime Minister.









•











•

