<!--start metadata-->
Title: Indonesia, Holland, Australia
Description: press statement
Date: c1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    INDONESIA ESIA - HOLLAND - AUSTRALIA
                                 By
                    Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.
          Possibly the most important, and certainly the most controversial 
matter that has been discussed in the Parliament in the last week concerns 
Dr.Subandrio's visit to Australia and the joint communique that was issued 
by the Foreign Ministers of the two countries,
          I thought it important to talk to you on this matter because there 
has been confused thinking on the issues involved.
          Traditionally, Australia has strongly supported Dutch sovereinty 
over West New Guinea - we have done this in private and through the
United Nations.  In addition, I think you will agree that it is most 
important to maintain the closest and most friendly relationship with
Indonesia.  This is a country of 80 or 90 million people, which has gone 
through many difficulties on its route to independence and stability; 
indeed, its objectives have not yet been fully achieved.
          Indonesia's rulers are not Communists, although there are
Communist elements within the country that have some support. As a whole, 
however, it can be said that the Indonesian government is not impressed with 
the kind of Communism that China would like to export.
          The attitude of the Western countries, and particularly of 
Australia, having regard to its geographical position, could be vital in
this matter.  If the Communists in Indonesia were able to point to Australia 
and say that country is opposed to our claims at all costs and at any price, 
then this would be a very powerful weapon indeed to move Indonesia into the
Communist camp.  The joint communique issued by Dr. Subandrio and Mr. Casey 
makes it impossible for Indonesia to speak in this manner.
          While not relinquishing our support for Holland over Dutch
New Guinea, we have said that if the Dutch and the Indonesians freely and 
lawfully come to some agreement upon Dutch New Guinea, then we will not
oppose it; indeed, what else could we say?  If we did oppose, we would be 
the only country in the world to do so, and our efforts would be futile. 
Our opposition would get no hearing in the United Nations under those
circumstances.  We would be left out on a limb giving Communists in

log

 INDONESIA -- HOLLAND - AUSTRALIA (Cont'd.)                            Page 2.
        By Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.

 countries like Indonesia an opportunity for propaganda against us which they 
 have never hitherto possessed.

         In view of the fact that there are 600 million pounds worth of 
 confiscated Dutch assets in Indonesia, the possibility of trade being done

 between Holland and Indonesia cannot be ruled out.  If this happens, we would
 be powerless to prevent it.   It is worth. remembering that Holland was

 prepared to submit the whole matter to the International Court.  If the 
 decision had gone in Indonesia's favour, would we have opposed that ???

 The joint statement recognised the limit to Australian influence.  We can 
 do what we like to bolster Holland's stand as we have in the past, but if, 
 despite this, Holland's view changes, then we must respect any lawful 
 agreement made.
         In a brief debate on this matter, the Opposition supported a

 regional pact for security and welfare concerning the whole of New Guinea. 

 It claimed that this pact should be made between Holland, Indonesia and
 Australia.   If there is any question of concessions in regard to this 
 matter, then this is the greatest concession of all, because it implies 
 that we should allow Indonesia and Holland to have some say in the welfare 

 and management of that part of New Guinea which comes under the Australian
 jurisdiction.   Such an attitude is defenceless,for Australia has always 
 carried out its obligations to the people in these Territories in an able 
 manner.

         Indeed, I do not think it can be said that the Government has given
 any concessions in this matter.   We maintain our support for Holland but we 
 have taken the realistic course and we have said publicly that we would not 

 oppose an agreement freely and lawfully reached between Holland and Indonesia. 

 I think this is the least the Australian Government could have done and at 
 the same time maintain friendly and good relations with our nearest neighbours
 in South-East Asia.   This is vital to Australia's future security.
         Above all else, it is essential that Indonesia be kept out of the 

 Communist orbit, and we must try to regulate our policy where we can to 
 help Indonesia's government in this regard.

