<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry, Australian Wool Corporation, trade with China
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 1/10/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     Cú,%n-v526.4z   Aer-"d aet.eu,A-G:.e ZA--3   LZZ 
                                                       ,efrp0/7,2„


         to J óZ d 3 4.air"4' A-c4A4a4
         • 





                                                          3HA - Sunday, 1 October 


            TEXT OF


                                                          3YB - Thursday, 5 October







            BROADCAST - BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASELK - Wednesday, 4 October







                            MEMBER FOR WANNON AND MINISTER FOR EDUCATION & SCIENCE















                        In the last week or two, there have been two notable 





            developments for the Australian wool industry. One was the 





            introduction of a bill in Federal Parliament to create the 





            new Australian Wool Corporation. In a sense, this was hardly 





            news because the Government's decision had been announced 





            earlier.












                       The second significant event was news. It was the 






            announcement of the unanimous endorsement of the wool 






            legislation by the executive of the Australian Wool Industry 





            Conference.












                       It is well known now that the Australian Wool 





            Corporation will be a statutory body combining the broad 





            functions of the Australian Wool Board and the Australian 






            Wool Commission.












                       As the Minister for Primary Industry said when he 





            introduced the bill, the merger will permit the integration of 





            research and promotion of the marketing of the clip, and thus 



•

            enable a total and fully co-ordinated approach to be adopted 





            in stimulating the demand for wool.












                       The reception the legislation received from the





            Executive of the Australian Wool Industry Conference was most 





            heartening.












                       Following meetings of the Conference's Executive 





            and the ad hoc committee on wool marketing in Melbourne, the 





            industry expressed its appreciation of the Government's bill 






            and its coverage of most of the recommendations submitted in 





           March by the Australian Wool Industry Conference to Mr Sinclair.





























                                                                         ...12







                                                                                              .c%

                               - 2




                 I would like to quote to you one or two of the 
        remarks of the AWIC Chairman, Mr A. J. Vasey. In a recent 
        statement he said, and I quote:


                "The proposals put forward in that bill are heartening and 
                 cover a great majority of the industry's recommendations 
                 for the future marketing of the Australian Wool Clip.


                "Many of the issues have been dealt with in great 
                 detail and, in some respects, have provided the 
                 industry with benefits beyond the Conference's 
                 expectations."


                 Mr Vasey went on to say that it was hoped that 
        Parliamentary approval for the bill would be given at the 
        earliest possible time.


                 He also supported the proposals to increase expenditure 
        on research and promotion, saying that it was of the utmost 
        importance that the industry should capitalise on the present 
        world-wide demand for wool.


                 When introducing the new legislation in Parliament, 
•       the Minister for Primary Industry dealt with the functions of 
        the new Corporation. He said that it was proposed that the 
        Corporation be given wide investigatory powers in regard to 
        wool marketing. It was also proposed to empower the Corporation 
        to recommend to the Government and the Australian Wool
        Industry Conference, any changes considered necessary in 
        marketing arrangements.


                 Mr Sinclair then said that such changes may, of course, 
        include the submission of a detailed plan for a compulsory 
        acquisition scheme.

                3


         The establishment of the Corporation is coming at 
    an encouraging time for the wool industry after the crisis 
    of last year when prices fell, so low.

         The latest weekly figures I have to hand at the 
    moment show that the average price of wool for the last week 
    was nearly 132 cents a kilo, just short of 60 cents a pound. 
    The average price for the season so far, has been about
    107 cents a kilo or approaching 49 cents a pound.

•        How permanent the improvement will prove to be, 
    whether the price will rise or fall or stabilize, we must 
    wait to see. But I think it is reasonable to say that the 
    Government's action in allowing the Australian Wool Commission 
    to buy wool at auction, thereby avoiding a total price collapse, 
    combined with the guaranteed 36 cents a pound minimum price 
    for growers, were decisive in saving the wool industry from 
    complete destruction last year.

         The new legislation is a genuine victory for those 
    people who, for years, have pressed for substantial wool 
    marketing reform. The Government means business and is 
    continuing to act positively, not only for the benefit for 
s   wool growers and for the wool industry, but to the advantage 
    of Australia's entire economy.

             - 4 -

        Finally, I am sure everyone, particularly those of 
   us engaged in primary industry, was delighted to hear the news 
   of the sale of 1 million tons of Australian wheat to mainland 
   China. It appears this contract will be worth about $60 million.


        Only 5 or 6 weeks ago, the Labor Party's shadow Minister 
   for Primary Industry, Dr. Rex Patterson, said, and I quote:

        "China will not buy any wheat from Australia 
         as long as the Australian Government continues
         its policy of hostility towards China."

        When he said that, Dr. Patterson was using the
i  wheat industry and the Australian people generally, as a vehicle 
   for misleading the world about Australia's attitude towards China.


        Now the lengths to which Labor will go to play politics 
   have been further disclosed. Not only is Dr. Patterson's allegation 
   of Australian hostility to China wrong, but on top of that, the sale 
   of wheat proves Dr. Patterson's bad judgment on China's attitude to 
   trade.


        Dr. Patterson seems to say whatever occurs to him at the 
   moment. Five weeks ago he was saying China would not buy any more 
   wheat from us. This week he said he had expected the sale for about 
410 three months.


        He cannot have it both ways. The wheat industry and 
   Australia would be better served if Dr. Patterson stopped trying 
   to involve trade in wheat with China with Labor Party politics.

