<!--start metadata-->
Title: The year of 1967
Description: radio talks
Date: 11/12/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       MINISTER FOR THE ARMY














                      M. P.














NA REEN,             PARLIAMENT HOUSE
VICTORIA             CANBERRA. A.C.T.
TEL. TARRAYOUKYAN 44 TEL. 72867
                       72868

RADIO SPEECH          3HA — 10 December 1967
MALCOLM FRASER        3YB — 14 December 1967



    The political year is nearly over and the holiday season is
now with us. Over the last week or two there has, however, been a good
deal of speculation about the results of the last Senate election and what,
in fact, it means. Some people have even suggested that the swing against
the Government was so great that if an election has been held for the
House of Representatives, the Labor Party would have won. This, of
course, is not so. Even on the votes as cast for the Senate the Government
would have had a workable and adequate majority. But it is quite true
that there was a swing against the Government in a number of states and
this especially so when the vote is compared with the extraordinarily
large Government vote of 12 months ago. At the present time, the Govern-
ment majority in the House of Representatives is 38 and I do not think
that anyone expected this overwhelming Government vote to be maintained.
It had never been achieved before and it was an accumulation of circumstances
last year that led to a flood away from the Labor Party. And so it was
inevitable that some of this swing would be reversed.

    There are those who say that this reversal is due to one thing — 
the replacement of Artìlur Calwell by Gough Whitlam. In part they may be 
correct because little else has been changed over the last 12 months except 
the leadership. This has involved a change in presentation of policies 
but the policies themselves are not really different. The ultimatum that 
the policy would present to the United States over Vietnam is still
virtually the same policy of withdrawal that Mr. Calwell espoused in 
blunter terms throughout last year and al.,hough there have been some minor 
changes to the structure of the ALP Executive and Conference these changes 
in themselves are not substantial. They mean that the Leaders and Deputy 
Leaders of the House of Representatives and Senate have been made members 
of the Federal Executive, and that they, together with the State Leaders 
and a representative from the Northern Territory, have been made members 
of the Federal Conference.

    For that matter the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party 
have been members of the Liberal Party Executive since its inception and 
State Premiers or Leaders have, whenever they have wished, come to Federal 
Conferences as members of their State Delegation.

    If the swing away from the Government is due to a greater or 
lesser extent to the change of leadership, let us have a look at this 
change to see how much it has meant. I will be comparing these figures 
with the Senate election figures for 1964. The Labor Party vote went up 
in N.S.W., which of course, is Gough Whitlam's home state, but even there

                2.


it went up by only 2.52%. In Queensland, the Labor Party vote went up 
by 1.4%. It also went up in Western Australia, but let us look at the 
other three states. In Victoria the Labor Party vote went down by 1.9%; 
in South Australia it was down by 3.3% and in Tasmania, it fell by over 
9%. Does this look like a great victory for the Labor Party/
    While in General terms the vote has been depicted as being one 
against the Government, the percentage of our vote has still increased in 
at least one state and that is South Australia.

    If we turn to Victoria, we find that the Senate vote we have
just had showed a reduced support for the Government of 2.1%, but the
Labor Party was also down and the DLP increased its vote by 3.41%. Indeed,
this was typical of DLP votes in most states. Their vote increased
substantially in Queensland and Western Australia, as well as in Victoria.
As a result, the DLP candidate in Victoria has achieved a quote in his own
right, and the DLP candidate in Queensland is also assured of Victory.
This will give that party four seats in the Senate and also the balance
of power. So far as I am concerned, if there had to be a swing against
the Government I was glad to see that it was a swing to the DLP, which by
and large supports the foreign affairs and defence policies of the Government
parties. Thus, in no way could these results be seen as a swing against
the Government on its defence policies.

    I also looked at the Senate figures for this electorate, and 
it was interesting to note that despite a slightly increased number on 
the roll, about 500 fewer people voted for the joint Government Senate team, 
but 1300 fewer voted for the Labor Party, while about 500 more voted for 
the Democratic Labor Party. So on these figures, compared with the 1964 
Senate figures, the vote was a good deal worse for the Labor Party.

    Throughout, you will notice that I have compared the Senate 
figures with the last Senate election in 1964, and I believe this is much 
more realistic than comparing them with the quite overwhelming vote, that 
the Government achieved 12 months ago.

    It is clear that the DLP will have the balance of power, and 
dependent upon the final outcome in South Australia and Western Australia 
but assuming the Government wins both, which appears to be likely, the final 
figures will be 28 seats for the Government, 27 for the Labor Party, 4 for 
the Democratic Labor Party and Senator Turnbull from Tasmania looks like 
being returned as the one Independent.

    Well, I think this is enough of the Senate.

              3.


     This will be my last talk until the Parliament resumes for its 
Autumn session next year.

     Everyone in this area must be extremely concerned at the way 
the season has turned out and at the damaging effects that this is having 
on the economy of Western Victoria. The drought is, of course, not 
exclusively ours. Very large areas are involved and it is too early to 
foretell what its final effects will be. This is a matter that I am 
watching with real concern, not only as your representative but also 
because I have a personal knowledge of what it means.

     My best wishes to you all for Christmas and the New Year.

