<!--start metadata-->
Title: 30 October-1 November
Description: Reports on proceedings in Canberra - radio talk 
Date: 11/11/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                               ©I~ i~R.~5~.i: ~ MS,R~3 :.~: FORW,~~dÃi~ÏN. C.C.,:a,      _ ~ f /1 4(
           o Ts ON                    NCM1 IN C F?Atk3hl.n A. : 30th Oct-1st Nov.

                      s woeK tiSs d ustralian Security Intelligence Organisation
Bili 1956 was passed about which I wrde a few words in my last 
article. The debate on this Bill did not begin until very late 
in the evening and it continued until after z o'clock on Wednesday
night.
                 During ail-night sittings et the end of a Session everyone 
tends to get a little bit on edge and I think it can easily be seen why, 
when umbers are in the Chamber from half past ten in the morning until 
half past eleven, twelve, one or two o'clock or even three in the 
following morning. That I think is more than a fair day's work b; 
  anyone's standards. However, these hours are not normal practice. 
  Towards the end of a Session when the Coverament is trying to keep 
  to a certain timetable it occasionally becomes necessary to have 
  one of these all-night sittings. When it ïdoes occur the House gets 
  up for a few moments at 11.30 when the Goverment, that is the 
  Cabinet, provide at their own expense supper of eggs or sausages
  for all the Members on both sides of the House.
                   These last few days were to have boon the last week of 
  this present Session before the House adjourned until neat year.
                   As you will now know the sudden and dramatic events of the 
  Middle East have made it necessary for us to re-assemble again for 
   reporta from the i'rime Minister on this rapidly changing scene.
                   Events are too confused and there is too little real 
   information of u positive character for us to form an honest and true 
   judgment of what has happened so far, as I write this.
                    However, the earlier events of revolts in Hungary and 
   i'oland do present a clear pActure and a grim reminder of the ugly 
   menace of communism and the cruel tyranny that it imposes on subject 
   races. It is quite clear at the present time that the Soviet Union
    under the guise of spreading com-:uniam                            hes become the greet e
    imperial power the world has seen, but                             Soviet imperialism differs in 
    a most important respect from what has                             been called in the peat Britid 
    imperialism. In the old days Lngland                               in search of trade and markets
    would colonise a country but in colonising a country she would teach

the local people the art of self-governglent, she would raise 
their standard of life and teach them how to manage their own 
affairs. They were primitive people in most cases who were 
being brought up to what we regarded as a higher standard of
civilisation.
          The story and the picture in Russia and th,, satellites 
is entirely end completely different. The Hungarians, l'oles, 
Rumanians. and Czechoslovakians are not in anyway primitive people 
on a lower civilisation. They are highly intelligent and have old 
culture backed by centuries of developmea and progress. Under 
the guise of spreading communism the Russians have destroyed the 
freedom of these people. They have kept Comm4nist puppets in 
power through the presence of their own armies in these foreign
lands.   They have not sought to teach these people the art of 
self-government for they had that already. They have merely 
sought to impose upon them a dictatorship of Government by one 
party where free elections are not allowed. The revolts in Poland
and Hungary are a cruel reminder that these are people who knew 
freedom and lost it. We cannot yet say what is going to be the 
outcome of their struggles, but it is significant that official 
reports from Peking from Communist China have offered the
 insurgents of Hung4ry and Poland their bes wishes in their struggle
for freedom and self-government. ,Z;uite clearly all is not at
peace in the Com[.tuiist mold,
           We hope and pray that Hungary and Poland will achieve 
what they are fighting for with great courage, but even if they do 
 not, even if Russian tanks and armour destroy the insurgents, their 
 revolt has served to remand the free world of the true nature 
 of communism and of the cruelty with which it is imposed upon 
 subject peoples. It is a lesson we must never forget.

