<!--start metadata-->
Title: Economic problems, unemployment, the Third World
Description: electorate radio talk
Date: 23/02/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL RADIO TALK                       Embargo: Sunday, 23rd Feb. 75. 
                                                     6.00 p.m.

           THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER



In answer to questions early this week, the Treasurer, Dr Cairns, put 
himself in direct contradiction to the Prime Minister concerning the 
nature of economic problems. On the 27th January, Mr Whitlam was re- 
ported to have said from Adelaide:


"You cannot blame Vietnam for the inflation in the Western world.


"You cannot blame the Oil crisis for the inflation in Australia. You
 cannot blame the takeovers and the currency rates for inflation in 
 Australia now.


"You have to place the blame on wage claims.


"What has happened in the past 12 months is that profits have been re- 
 duced very greatly in every form of activity.


"Wage claims in the past 12 months have so greatly reduced theprofit-
 ability of employers that they have ceased to employ.


" As long as wage demands continue to cut profit then there is going 
 to be unemployment.


"Every excessive increase in income for one man takes the job of another."


Dr Cairns on the other hand, in answer to a question, said that the pre- 
sent condition of the economy is a condition of recession, as it is 
around the world, as it is a result of the same conditions applying in 
every country. They apply in the United States and Europe and in Aust- 
ralia just as much.


Dr Cairns plainly believes that we are experiencing world-wide problems 
as a result of events overseas. The Prime Minister made it plain that 
he did not blame overseas events, that he blamed events within Australia. 
The Prime Minister is ofcourse correct, but as the economic situation 
worsens, I believe there will be an increasing attempt on the part of 
the government to try and suggest that economic difficulties are caused 
from overseas.


What's happened to unemployment


There seems to be a strange apathy in the community about unemployment. 
When we were in government, if unemployment rose much above 100,000, we 
would be kicked all around the world and accused of the most grievous 
crimes.


                                                               ../2

                                  2.

   Now unemployment is standing significantly over 300,000 or 5% and what 
   happens: The trade unions are largely silent on the subject - the Pre-
-/ sident of the A.C.T.U. does not say much, and the government tries to 
   pretend unemployment does not exist.

   It is true that a small minority of those unemployed do get very great:, 
   benefits under the Income Maintenance Scheme which gives people put out 
   of work as a result of tariff cuts a very greatly added advantage ag- 
   ainst those put out of work from other causes. Some are also helped 
   in the re-training scheme, but these two schemes only help a minority, 
   and in relation to total numbers, a small minority.

   Rural Unemployment

   A very significant part of unemployment occurs in non-metropolitan areas 
   about 115,000 of 300,000 come from outside the great capital cities. 
   Some of the policies of the government have particularly hit rural in- 
   dustries: the textile, clothing and footwear industries are in diffic-
4  ulties, the superphosphate industry is grinding to a standstill, and the 
   sheep and beef industries are in a tragically serious situation.

   With Ian Sinclair I raised these questions in a debate in parliament last 
   week. One thing that concerned me specifically was a need for the gov- 
   ernment to continue support for wool marketing after June 1975. I be- 
   lieve that this could make a difference of $2 a head for sheep and that 
   it would bring people back into the wool market. At the moment they are 
   hanging out of the market believing that they might be able to buy wool 
   cheaper after the 30th June.

   People should not be concerned about the increase in wool stocks because 
   current wool stocks are about the average of the last 10 years, They 
   are being held by the corporation rather than the speculator and I think, 
   that is preferable. The general tax payer also must understand that 
   the wool industry is paying very fully for the funds made available for 
   the wool - it is no gift made available from the government or tax payer.

   The Third World

   A number of things have occured in Question Time in parliament which have 
   not been adequately reported. In the first week of parliament in reply 
   to a question the Prime Minister blamed the United States for being the 
   principle party breaking the Paris Agreements concerning Vietnam. He 
   said that he had made it quite plain that South Vietnam should do more 
   to carry out the Paris Agreements-which were meant to bring peace to 
   South Vietnam and which are over two years old.

   The Prime Minister made no mention of North Vietnam, of Russian and 
   Chinese supplies pouring into North Vietnam and down to the South, and

                                 ../3

of the North Vietnamese army of over 300,000 men in South Vietnam.

On the 18th February he was asked another question on the subject and 
the Prime Minister replied that he had complained to the government of 
South Vietnam. He failed to mention any complaint to the North Viet- 
namese government in Hanoi to which Australia is now accredited.

This is consistent with the track the Prime Minister has taken over 
the last 23/4 years. Where there is an opportunity he casts blame on 
the United States or the United Kingdom and does what he can to promote 
Russia and China and their allies, The Prime Minister's march to the 
Third World has been a very rapid one.

