<!--start metadata-->
Title: Where is the women's place?
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 21/03/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                          . •  HERE IS -THE.                   S , PLACE.

                                           sk/ANwow
          In my travels through kmatii4ca as I knock on doors of farms, 
or town houses the housewife has often said when she heard who I was, 
"Oh, I don't know much about any of that you had better go and see 
Tom or Jack" as the case may be.

         In the eyes of the law women take equal place and as people 
with feelings and emotions common to every person, tneinjoyment 
of the good things of life in this country is as important to the 
Government as lsine happiness of any other individual.

         In the old days when Governments were concerned more with
foreign policy defence and maintenance of justice than with the happiness 
of each individual there was neither the opportunity nor the scope for 
the active participation of women in public afiairs.

         We have gone along, way since the 15th centuryie laanual of
Chivalry prescribed this treatment for a scolding wife. "He smote her 
with his fist down to the earth and then with his foot he smote her 
in the visage and broke her nose," John Stuart Mill a reformer of last 
century and Florence Nightingale were two of the earliest and most 
influential advocates of the position that women hold today. Many of 
you will remember the struggles of the sufiragets in England in the years 
before and after the first great wart Vtruggles which ended in success 
and the vote for women vedayin 1928. Australian women were granted this 
right many years earlier in 1902,

         When the Government Administration affects nearly every aspect 
of life it is not hard to find spheres in which women's advice is not 
only desirable but necessary if the most efficient job is Jo e- aone. 
In many matters affecting the happiness of womeR and families the 
knowledge and experience of women must be given great importance. 
But it is not only in the domestic sphere that women are capable of 
taking an active part. Madame Pandit Nehru':as been elected president 
of the U. N. General Council Assembly, the first women in the world to 
preside over an Assembly of 60 nations. However we do net have to go 
so far afield to find the pre-eminent example. Our own Queen
Elizabeth 11 yommmo by her grace and charm and sympathy has won the deep
and lasting affection of everyone of us.                         In this second Elizabethan 
age it is a fitting sign that the most important person in this 
British Empire and Commonwealth of Nations is a woman.

         In these days of drastic changes and of extreme creeds the 
choice of its government is possibly the most important part that each 
person, man and woman accomplish together. The vote is not to be 
cast lightly on one side or another. We must remember the growth of
our democratic            stem. The struggles and sufferings that A; our English
men and women                to AATtve the passage of the first great reform 
bill in 1832, and which continued, to culminate in the 41.-a-0-t Bill of 
the Gladstaniawliberals bin 1384) which granted the vote to every man 
over 21.

         In Australia men and women over 21 have had the vote longer 
than people in most other countries. Each one of us, every man and 
every woman must think and give his or her judgement carefully. The 
future of Australia, the development of our resources the creation of 
more prosperous homes for hap y Austfalians, these are the things we 
want, that we may be strong and united.in defence of our own people. 
domen as well as men have their equal part in this country, they have 
their equal shares of happiness/and prosperity, the choice too must be 
equally theirs.

•  •            WEILRE Leeeeleete2L...E.
                      veleeeff
      In my travels through à1e-a as I knock on doors cf farms, 
 or town houses the housewife has often said when she heard w' I was, 
 "Oh, /17 don't know much aboet any of that you had better go and see 
 Tom or Jack" as the case may be.

      In the eyes of the law women take equal place and as people 
 with feelings and emotions common to every person, the enjoyment 
 of the good thin of life in this country is as important to the 
 Government as is the Caprinees of any other indtvidu-al.

      in the old days when_ Governments were concerned more with
 foreign policy defence and maintenance of justice than with the happiness 
 of each individual there was neither the opeortunity nor tee scope for 
 the active partielpaten of women in public afrairs.

      We have gone along way since the 15th eenturyaeoManual of
 Chivalry prescribed this treatment for a scalding wife. He smote her 
 with his fist down to the earth ane then with his foot he smote her 
 in the visage and broke her nose," John Stuart Mill a reformer of last 
 century and Ylorence Nightingale were two of the earliest and most 
 influential advocates of theposition that women hold today. Many of 
 you will remember the strueeles of the euffragets in England In the years 
 before and efter the first great eerc AStruegles which ended in success 
 and tee vote for women ONVe in 192P,./ iltltrian women were grented\this 
 right many years earlier in 1902.

      Treen the Government Adetnietration affects nearly every aspect 
 of life it is not hard to find spheres in wIstch women's advice is not 
 only desirable but necessary ¶f the most efficient r)b is to be done. 
 In many matters affecting the happiness of women eald-femillesethe 
 knowledge and experlenee of women muet be given eeet ineortance. 
 But it is riot only in the domestic sphere that women are -capable of 
 takine an active part. Madame Pandit Nehru has been elected president 
 of the U. N. General. Ceencil Assemble the first women in the world to 
 preside over an Assembly of 60 nations. However we do not have to go 
 so far afield to find the pre-eminent example. Our ova eyeen
 Elizabeth 11 by her gr7e and charm and sympathy has won the deep 
 and lasting affection of everyone of us. In this second Elizabethan 
 age it is a fitting sign that the most important person in this
 British Empire and Commonwealth of tions is a woman.

      In these days of drastic changes cadof extreme creeds the
 choice of its government is possibly the moot important part that each
 person, man and woman accomplish together. The vote is not t< be
 cast lightly on one side or another. We must remember the growth cf
 our democraticFirosutem. The struggles and sufferings that afa-our English
 men and womentcs. Aattve the passage of the first great reform
 bill in 1832, and which continued, to culminate in the f4i4met Bill of
 the Gladstania 1ibera1sn 188i9 which granted the vote to every man
 over 21. <e-

      In Australia men and women over 21 have had the vote longer 
 than people in most other countries. Each one of us, every man and 
 every woman must think and give his or her judgement carefully. The 
 future of Australia, the development of our resources the creation of 
 more prosperous tomes for happy Australians., these are the things we 
 want, thnt we may be strong and united.in défence of our own people. 
 Women as well as men have their equal part in this country, they have 
 their equal shares of happiness/and prosperity, the choice too must be
 equally theirs.  43e4-147.

