<!--start metadata-->
Title: Housing
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 16/03/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                             )14A-     4.)D/s--r


           s Nast weekdebate on the Adams in-Reply has 
continued. Dr. Evatt cvnentrated his attack in the main on two 
subjects, housing and employment. Today I want to talk about 
housing.
       I believe tha t is not clearly understood just what the 
Government has done on this most important subject but before placing 
the facts in front of you so that you yourselves may judge on this 
scatter, I want to say that adequate and good housing for our people 
is probably the most important material objective of civilised 
society. Without a good home it is impassible to have happy lives 
or to bring up families in surroundings that will help them to find 
their true place in the world and to stake good citizens.
       The criti ism of the Government on housing arose about 
this time last year when the rate of house building declined to 
a certain extent. There were several reasons for this decline. 
Trading Banks were lending less money for housing. Life Assurance 
Companies were lending less. Cc-operative Housing Societies,, for a 
period, had been getting less money and so had been able to finance 
less homes. Also, in 1956, a new Commonwealth-States Housing 
Agreement was signed but before agreement had been reached on this 
matter some States had heavily curtailed their building programmes.
       Another feature was the fact that house building in 
Western Australia fell by 40% due in a large measure to the fact 
that the shortage had been largely overcome in that state. This 
heavy reduction in home building in Western Australia was reflected
in the overall figures of building for the Commonwealth.
       The Commonwealth has recognised that there was need for 
more money to be put into housing not only to overcome these factors 
that I have just mentioned but also to help reduce the lag in home 
buildingg, more quickly.
        everal things have been done tea achieve this end. This 
year, £34M. is being made available to the States under the 
Comonwealth-states Housing Agreement. An extra £fi16 bas been 
made available to 4ar Service Homes bringing the total to £3511.
in this year. I am very happy to be able to say that this extra

                       .2.
      r War Service Homes has meant that there is now no delay 
      ervicemen who wish to obtain War Service finance to build 
 their own home, although I am afraid there are still considerable 
delays for those servicemen who wish to buy an existing home.
         In addition to these two major contributions to home 
building, the Commonwealth subsidises the buildi.ng of houses for 
aged people and under this category since 1954 homes for over 
4,000 peoAsit have been built.
         With the building that the Commonwealth is undertaking 
in the A.C.T., the total sum which the Commonwealth is directly 
putting into housing at the present time is at the rate of CM 
a year. Additional funds are also coming from both public and 
private Savings Banks. Furthermore, a considerable part of the
money recently made available to the States at the Special Loan 
Council Meeting has, at the Government's wish, been put into 
housing. All this goes to show that a lot of money is being put 
into housing either directly or indirectly by the Commonwealth 
but, in the final anktysis„ we can only judge whether the position 
is satisfactory or not by the number of houses that are being 
built and by the number of houses that are required.
        Last years the number of houses commenced had dropped to 
just over 66,000 a year. At the present moment it is estimated 
that seventy-one and a half thousand houses will be completed in 
this year. This show a considerable rise over last year's figure.
        Now, I have said that houses are being built at a rate
a little bit better than 74000 a year. The increase In our 
population requires 53,000 houses in each year. This means t 
we are overtaking the back log in home building at the rate of 
18,000 to 19,000 houses in each year. Accumulated arrears frost 
the war and the iediate post-war years was 250,000 houses in 
1947. This figure was reduced to 115,000 houses by 1956. By the 
end of June, 1957 it had been further reduced to 99,000 houses and 
We are reducing this figure at the rate of about 20,000 houses 
a year.
        I know it is , impossible for the person who wants

 home and who cannot immediately get one to be satisfied with the 
present situation and we cannot rest while that situation remains 
but I think the foregoing story does show that quite a lot is being 
done ix e overcome this problem. In some of the smaller States, house 
building has practically ceased for the simple reason that thelr 
shortage has been overcome and in the States with the most rapid 
growth a great deal is being done to overcome the back log.
     I am quite certain that this situation will be very 
carefully watched and if, in the future, it appears that more funds 
are essential to maintain a balance in the home building industry, 
then I believe the Government will act again as they have in the past.



16/3/58.

