<!--start metadata-->
Title: Telephone tapping
Description: press statement
Date: 5/06/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT                                     June 5th,1960
MALC OLM FRASER
                           TELEPHONE TAPPING
         In the recent session of Parliament the Attorney-General, Sir 
Garfield Barwick,. introduced a Bill called Telephonic Communications 
Interceptions Bill: This name is a bit of a mouthful, but the Bill was 
a most important one in the legislative history of this Government.
         The main purpose of the Bill is to prohibit all telephone 
tapping except for two most important reasons.
         The Bill is important because the Commonwealth has had power 
to have telephones tapped for a very long time, and this power has gone 
unregulated and unwatched so far as the Parliament is concerned.
         The present Government has now had the courage to bring the 
whole matter out into the light so that people will know exactly what 
is going on and exactly what the very limited circumstances are under 
which a particular 'phone may be tapped and a conversation listened in to 
without the knowledge of the parties concerned.
         I want to say from the outset that telephone tapping is some-
thing which every Australian and ever/freedom loving person would much
sooner do without. It is abhorrent to our way of life, it is contrary 
to all the things which we have been brought up since childhood to 
respect and to hold dear. However, every western country has, in recent 
years, found it necessary to-have a Security Service to guard against 
subversive activities. Our memories do not need to be particularly 
long to know that Hitler's job in the days of Germany's conquests of 
Europe was made much easier by Fifth columns which had penetrated 
countries long before German armed forces actually made the conquest.
         The purpose of Security Forces in all the freedom loving 
countries is to guard against this kind of happening in the event of our 
being involved in a war of one kind or another. •
         It is worth noticing that Mr. Chifley realised the importance
of a Security Service for Australia, and after the war time Service, 
brought in as a result of war time measures, was disbanded in 1946 he 
soon realised that Australia needed a Security Service and such a 
Service was formed in 1949. Indeed, 92% of the officers of that Force 
are still people who were appointed by the then Prime Minister, Mr. 
Chifley.

                                2
            This Bill, prohibits all tapping except for two important 
 exceptions, and so fer as those are concerned the Bill, for the 
 first time, sets out the rules and procedures which must be 
 followed before any telephone can be tapped. The procedures 
 are strict and the fines and the sentences against charges of 
 illegal tapping of telephones are very heavy indeed — a fine of
 £500 or• up to two years imprisonment.  Telephone tapping was 
 not prohibited before this legislation was brought into being.
           The two exceptions to the prohibitions are these. 
 The first is one that has always been permissable under• the 
 legislation establishing the Postmaster—General's Department and, 
 at times, we have probably all heard of people who make a habit 
 of ringing up strangers on the telephone and saying abusive or 
 obscene things to them. This is sometimes done as a perverted 
 form of persecution of a particular person. If the person to 
 whom those calls are addressed asks the Postmaster—General's 
 Department to try and trace the caller and the sender of those 
 obscene messages then, at the request of the person concerned, 
 the Postmaster—General's Department can tap that subscribers 
 telephone; this is, 0f course, done with the subscribers knowledge.
           Secondly, the Bill makes it possible for the Director— 
 General of Security to ask the Attorney—General to issue a warrant 
 for a limited period which will give him permission to have a 
 telephone tapped if the Director—General is reasonably certain 
 that the telephone is going to be used for subversive purposes.
          There are many safeguards built around this legislation, 
and even though tapping of any form goes against our natural 
inclinations reasonable men must admit that the two exceptions 
made to the general prohibition are most necessary for the 
protection of our community.
          It is worth remembering that this legislation is not 
doing anything new, it is not starting anything that has not been 
going on for a long time since before the present Government came 
into power, but what this legislation does and what has taken
some courage to do, is the fact that this legislation defines

                                  3

what is meant by telephone tapping and it defines the 
circumstances under which that tapping may be carried out. 
Before all this was done under the lap without any rules,
without any prohibitions, without any limits to what could be 
done. Now the limits are very strict indeed.
           In view of this it is difficult to see why the Labour 
Party as a whole opposed this legislation in the Parliament, 
especially since certain Labour spokesmen have, over the last 
eighteen months or two years, constantly questioned the
Government , asking the Government to introduce legislation and 
rules for this business which would be roughly in accord with what 
is done in the United Kingdom. Indeed, what has been done is 
now stricter than what is done in the United Kingdom because in 
that country a telephone can be tapped for police purposes and 
for customs purposes. In this country that has never been done 
in the past, although it could have been, before this legislation. 
Now with the passage of this legislation telephone tapping for 
those purposes is absolutely prohibited.
           On November let, 1957, Mr. Clyde Cameron did in fact 
ask the Government to do exactly what it has done. Since Mr. 
Cameron's question described the Bill clearly I will conclude with 
it. Mr. Cameron asked:—
           "I desire to ask the Prime Minister a question relating 
to recent reports of a Committee of Privy Councillors on a practic 
of telephone tapping in the United Kingdom and, in particular, to 
the conclusions and recommendations of that Committee. Is the 
Right Honorable gentleman prepared to give an undertaking that 
in accordance with those recommendations telephone tapping will 
not be carried on in Australia except in cases of criminal or 
subversive activities, and then only upon the issue of a warrant 
for a specified period, which warrant, at the end of the period,
will have to be renewed before the tapping can continue.         Will 
]_e also undertake that the name of any person,the tapping of 
whose telephone has been authorised,will be supplied to the
Prime Minister personally.       Will he introduce legislation to

              4

make it a criminal offence for any person to tap a telephone or to 
open letters in the course of their transit througL the post, other 
than in accordance with the proceedings to which I have referred."
    So far as telephone tapping is concerned this question does, 
in fact, admirably describe what has been done in the Bill. It is 
difficult to under—stand why Mr. Cameron and other members of his 
Party op:osed the Bill.
     All Australians would agree that this is an unpleasant 
measure, and most of us would be far happier without it. However, 
I think it is necessary for the security of Australia and therefore 
I support it.

