<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government, economy
Description: electoral talk
Date: 27/07/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL TALK                    For Sunday 27th July, 1975 3HA
                                  & Thursday 31st July, 1975 3YB





THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER




For the last two and a half years, the present Government has been 
endeavouring to turn Australians into a nation of bureaucrats.

Steadily, through the twin weapons of high taxation and political 
centralisation, the Whitlam government has been working to bring 
about a new social order.

The political scene has been stewn with slogans about multi- 
national corporations and buying back the farm.

The present Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Crean, when he was Treasurer 
caused a run on building societies.

He advised Australians to invest in the Stock Exchange, and then 
set about the destruction of private enterprise through an ineptly 
handled credit squeeze.

The Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr. Connor, attacked the 
men who built Australia's mining industry as hillbillies.

The Labor Caucus chose the wrong men for the ministry and the 
Prime Minister chose the wrong men for specific portfolios.

As a result, we have had two reshuffles in less than three years and 
three Treasurers.

The nation is afflicted with record levels of unemployment, of 
inflation, of interest rates and of industrial unrest.

Over the last year productivity has declined. Throughout the
country economic creativity has been assaulted and destroyed.

It may be years before the building industry recovers. The textile
and clothing industries, the rural industries, are all reeling under 
the impact of the Goyernment's policies.

There have been no new major development projects begun since the
Government took office.  The search for oil has effectively halted.


The total of these and many other factors is a most serious crisis 
in the economy.

The approach of the Government to 'consequences of its own 
extravagance and incompetence points to a crisis in individual 
freedom.

As private industry is run down, so the public service grows. 
Employment last year in private industry was down by 140,000, while 
employment in the public sector was up by 80,000.

ELECTORAL TALK               -2                   27/71/5 : 31/7/75

As a result of Government policy, the time of the public service, 
down through State to Local Government level, is increasingly taken 
up with red tape.

It is not enough for the Government to provide funds through its
R.E.D. Scheme for unemployment relief.  It must also require local 
Councils to take up time and money justifying to Canberra how these
funds are spent.  Federal Ministers are involved in decisions on 
kerbing and guttering rural footpaths.

The Government in Canberra has reduced the status of State and Local 
Governments and made the average person more and more subject to 
remote decisions.

It has destroyed his job security through wide sections of the 
community, giving him the alternative of seeking a place in the 
public service, which is massive, hierarchical and not to everyone's 
liking.

Through the tax system it has progressively robbed him of the
power to decide how his own income is to be spent. When the 
Opposition Parties return to Government it will be their task to 
restore the emphasis to true individualism which emphasises the 
value of each person.

Social change is inevitable and desirable, but the path to be 
followed must be one that contributes towards the self esteem of 
individuals and the respect with which they hold each other.

Australian citizens must have maximum possibly participation in 
tu.- decisions which affect them, and maximum control over the 
incomes they earn.

Fro- enterprise means a choice of jobs and of goods in the market 
place, and in this way control by the citizen over what is produced.

It means economic productivity for the business community, which is 
the source of national prosperity.

A significant aspect of the Opposition approach is being unveiled 
this week.

The new policy on industrial relations is designed to produce a 
system in which mutual respect will operate to stabilise the preseni 
chaotic system.

The policy is in many ways more enlightened than anything that has 
come from the Labor Party.

There has been speculation about the nature of the consequences which 
this legislation provides for breaches of industrial law.

ELECTORAL TALK               -3-            27/7/%5 : 31/7/75


In any rational society there are rules for every area of activity, 
and the industrial arena is too important for it to be made an 
exception.

So naturally there will be consequences when agreed industrial 
rules are breached.

But these consequences will be determined by means of a judicial
process.  There will be no return to the circumstances of the 
1960's in which once a bans clause was placed in an award, if the 
Union then went on strike there would be an automatic fine even if 
a strike was provoked by employers.
The new policy is far sighted. It is also the first of a series 
of revised policy statements which have begun to flow as part of 
the continuing process of policy review.

