<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool sales conference
Description: press statement
Date: 8/04/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT:

 MALCOLM FRASER:


                                                   April 8th, 1962



                   PORTLAND WOOL SATES CONFERENCE



             By now, it is widely known that last week a conference called 
 by the Premier to discuss Portland wool sales was held but that no agreement 
 could be reached at the Conference and, as a consequence, the Premier said 
 he would hold an economic inquiry into the justification of Portland's case. 
 I thought it might be of interest if I recapitulate what happened but first, 
 may I say that I am grateful to the Opposition for having made a pair avail- 
 ablo to me for this important meeting.

             I do not pretend that my presence made any difference to the 
 outcome of the Conference but since I have lived with the Portland issue from 
 the very moment that the Commonwealth decided to sell the wool store, I 
 particularly wanted to be present at this Conference which was important to
 the cause.    I want to see this Portland matter through to its successful 
 conclusion if it is humanly possible.

            Also let me say that the other member of the Woolgrowers' 
 deputation who was present, Bob McClure, added a great deal of strength to
 the Portland case.    This may be one of the few cases in which people 
 who belong to different political parties have worked as a team in a matter 
 of some importance. I think this is also evidence of the fact that, so far 
 as Western Victoria is concerned, Portland is not a party political issue.

            Now, let me get down to the Conference.

            The Premier, of course, was in the Chair. The Hon. R. W. Mack, 
 M.L.C. was present and, as you know, Bob McClure and myself represented the
growers.    Mr. Gale and Mr. Strachan represented the National Council of
Wool Selling Brokers.   Mr. Lempriere and Mr. Greenwood represented the 
Australian Council of Wool Buyers.

            I was very pleased that, at the outset of the meeting, the
Premier made his own views quite plain.  He supported the Portland case 
and argued strongly in its favour; so also did Ron Mack. The Premier could 
not have been of more help to the woolgrower representatives.

            The discussion took place for one and a half hours. It was 
mostly concerned with the attitudes of different sections of the industry.
The Premier began by making his position known. Then Bob McClure and 
myself briefly summarised Portland's claims, after which the discussion
went ahead on general lines. Neither the buyers nor the brokers brought
forward any new arguments.  They rested their case on matters that have 
been well publicised over the last twelve months.

            Because of recent figures that Ì had obtained from Commonwealth 
statistical sources I was able to show that Portland is adjacent to an area 
that produces more wool than almost any other area in Australia. Some 
interesting analogies could be made. There is a wool selling centre at 
Albany, for instance, that serves an area that produces about 150,000 or
160,000 bales of wool.  Tasmania has two selling centres that service about
100,000 bales of wool.   If a selling centre were established at Portland,
the area it would logically serve produces 455,000 bales and this is all
within 150 miles of Portland.  It is interesting to note that, over the 
last ten years, this area - within 150 miles of Portland - has increased its 
wool production from 250,000 bales to about 455,000 bales. In compiling 
these figures, all those areas that were nearer Geelong than Portland were 
excluded. It should be noted that this rate of increase is much greater



                                                            /2.

                                 -2 -

than Australia's average. Indeed, it could well be the greatest rate of
increase in production of any area in Australia. It is certainly the most 
productive woolgrowing area that has not got its own wool selling centre.

           The other areas in Australia which produce the largest quantities 
of wool probably are found in certain areas of New South Wales. They are 
served by four selling centres - Albury, Goulburn, Sydney and Newcastle. 
Two of these selling centres are not on a harbour and the wool has to be 
handled after sale to take it to the ships.

           T have always known that Western Victoria was magnificent wool- 
growing country, but before examining these figures I had not realised the 
more than significant part that this area plays in Australia's overall wool 
production.

           I brought these arguments forward at the meeting together with 
other arguments which are well known to people in this area. There is no 
point in recapitulating the arguments that were used at the meeting but I may 
say that the discussion was, in general, on a high plane. The matter was 
discussed, in general, calmly. However, no agreement could be reached. 
No concessions were offered.. There was no sign of compromise from the 
brokers or the buyers.

           When it became clear that the Conference would not achieve any 
positive result, the Premier said that the matter could not be allowed to rest. 
He wanted to see wool sales at Portland. Since the brokers and the buyers 
had based their opposition on economic grounds, and since these grounds were 
disputed by those arguing in Portland's favour, the Premier said that an 
independent economic inquiry would be held into the position of Portland as a
centre for wool sales.  He indicated that moves would be established to get 
such an inquiry appointed as soon as possible.

           I am confident of the outcome of such an inquiry because I believe 
I have examined the economics of this matter with an open mind and it is my 
belief that the economics strongly favour Portland's case. However, these 
matters will be discussed in an open inquiry and the truth of the position will 
become known. There must, of course, be some degree of risk that an inquiry 
will find against our interests but if wd have belief in our own judgments, 
if we are confident of our case - as we are, we should be and are prepared to 
have it examined by an impartial scrutiny,

           A great deal of work will have to be done in preparing Pbrtland's 
case, in documenting the evidence and in making sure that no loopholes are
overlooked.   I am sure this will be done.  I have already told the 
Managing Director of Portland Wool Brokers that if I can be of any help in 
preparing this evidence I will be more than happy to do so. I have already 
begun to obtain material from the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and from 
our Statistical Department at Canberra which I think will be of help.

           Both Bob McClure and myself agreed after the meeting that the 
Premier could not have been of more assistance to us. He made his own views 
plain. He wanted wool sales at Portland. He made this fact known to the
brokers and the buyers.   I hope that the morale of woolgrowers will be 
lifted by the outcome of this Conference. Although it has not achieved any 
positive result in the sense that an agreement was reached, it has, never- 
theless, brought to light the full support of the Premier and that means 
something in a struggle of this kind. In addition, this independent inquiry
will keep the matter moving.  It will serve to have the arguments for and 
against Portland examined in an impartial manner and it will enable the 
untruths that have been spoken about Portland to be put to rest once and for
all.   For example, it is still being said and it was said at the meeting 
that wool sold at Portland would have to be sold f.o.b. Melbourne. Such
is simply not the case.   At the inquiry it will be possible to demonstrate 
that it is not the case.


                                                             /3.

                                 3


             If the inquiry finds in favour of Portland, as I believe it will 
from my own examination of the facts, I think it will be difficult indeed for 
the brokers and the buyers to maintain their opposition.

             I would also like to draw attention to the fact that the 
Victorian Wheat and Woolgrowers' Association has given repeated and strong 
support to the Portland cause, and at its recent State Conference it passed 
a resolution urging the establishment of such an independent inquiry failing
a successful Conference.   In addition to this, the Australian Woolgrowers' 
and Graziers' Council,on the initiative of the South Australian Stockowners' 
Association, have asked that such an inquiry into the justification of Portland
as a centre for selling wool should be held. The Australian Primary 
Producers' Union has also supported the Portland case. Thus, there is a real 
degree of agreement between woolgrower organizations not only on a State level
but also on a Federal level. The brokers and the buyers should also take 
some note of this greater support.

            We believe the Portland case rests on firm ground, and the 
growers' deputation is glad that the case is to be tested by an independent
inquiry.   From its very first meeting with the Premier the deputation had 
asked for an independent inquiry to be held believing that the brokers and the 
buyers would not be prepared to compromise round the table. Although every 
effort to convince them that this should be done was made in a friendly and 
positive manner no compromise was forthcoming and thus we have the inquiry.

