<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mr Whitlam and the glass of water
Description: press statement
Date: 10/10/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                "ow


PRESS S TATE1 ENT

MALCOLM FRASER :

                      October 10th,1965


        MR. WHITLA,M AND THE GLASS OF WATER


     In this last week the debates were marred by one of those 
incidents which should nob occur in the Federal Parliament. The 
debate concerned an amendment to a Repatriation Bill which would have 
extended benefits to certain people. The Government had made up its 
mind concerning the limits of any possible extensions when the Budget 
was formed earlier this financial year and, therefore, it felt unable 
to accept the amendment which would have involved some additional 
millions of pounds. It was an amendment that affected members of the 
Salvation Army.

     During the debate in the House of Representatives, when 
Mr. Hasluck was seated at the table, Mr. Whitlam made some remarks 
concerning Mr.Hasluck's parents who were Salvation Army people - a 
matter of which, I am sure, Mr. Hasluck is rightly proud, but the 
implication of Mr. Whitlam's remarks was that, because Mr. Hasluck 
agreed with the Government's decision opposing the amendment, he was 
betraying his own parents. This sort of remark is quite unnecessary.

     When people enter the political arena they know full well 
that all sorts of things are going to be said about them, especially if 
they become successful politicians and make their mark in their own 
Party. Politicians, as a body, accept this, but the great majority of 
us become more than a little annoyed when the attacks against us are 
broadened to cover friends or family of one kind or another. Tt is 
usually the politicians who are subject to attack and, from the nature 
of our profession, we must expect it, but we also have a right to expect 
that people who may be close to us can remain immune from such attacks.

     Mr. Whitlam, as a leading member of the Opposition, should 
know of these customs, but it is unfortunately typical of the sort of 
petulence which sometimes breaks through in a manner I am sure he would 
deplore, as much as the rest of us, once he has done it but at times he 
seems unable to restrain himself.

     This was the incident, of course, which ended with Mr. 
Whitlam throwing a glass of water across the table of Parliament House 
into Mr. Hasluck's face.

     The papers probably built this up into much more than it 
really is. The Melbourne "Herald" had some headlines which might have 
been large enough for a declaration of war, and one of the papers had a 
cartoon of Mr. Whitla, speaking at the table with the Frime Minister 
sitting opposite in a bathing suit with a towel over his shoulder, with 
Mr. Holt in his skin-diving outfit with a snorkel attached, and with 
other front-bench members protecting themselves with umbrellas and 
raincoats.

     I think the incident has probably quite severely damaged 
Mr. Whitlam in the eyes of his own close supporters, because they believe 
that a potential leader should not be open or vulnerable to this kind of 
unfortunate temperament.

     Unluckily, this was not the only incident of this kind during 
the waek, although the second one was of a much more minor nature, but it 
did reveal the same outlook.


                             /2

                                 2



            The Prime Minister spoke on the Bill concerning the
waterfront and Mr. Whitlam was to follow. When Er. Whitlam got up 
he said something to the effect that he would not start speaking until 
the Prime Minister had finished ambling out of the Chamber. Again, 
Mr. Whitlam knows that the Prime Minister has many duties and appoint- 
ments and functions, apart from listening to speeches in the Parliament. 
Mr. Whitlam may have been peeked that the Prime Minister was not staying 
to listen to him. On this particular occasion, the Prime Ainister 
returned to announce that he had an appointment with Mr. Monk, President 
of the Australian Council of Trade Unions.






                               o0o

