<!--start metadata-->
Title: Papua New Guinea Department
Description: press statement
Date: 2/07/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   PRESS STATEMENT
                                                              July 2nd,1961

                             In the years since the war the Postmaster-General's
                   Department has had three main tasks. Firstly, it has had to 

                   try to catch up with the lag in progress that was an inevitable 
                   result of the war years and this, as you can imagine, created 
                   a great demand for the P.M.G's services of all kinds.
                             however, in addition to this, the Department has had
                   to meet the challenge of a developing Australia. The develop- 

                   ment this country has experienced, especially in the last decade, 

                   has placed a tremendous strain on the resources of the 
                   Department and, furthermore, the Department has had to keep 

                   abreast with modern techniques in its own particular field. 

                   It is my belief that the Postmaster-General's Department has 
                   answered these challenges and that each member of the Department 
                   should be proud of being an important part in a business that 

                   covers the whole of Australia and which has many connections 
                   well beyond the boundaries of Australia.
                             To give some idea of the scope and size of the
•                  Postmaster-General's Department's operations. In 1959/60 the 
                   turnover of the Department was over £1 thousand million. There 
                   were 86 thousand full-time employees, just over 10 thousand
                   post offices.  The Department handled just under 2 thousand 

                   million letters and there were one thousand five hundred million 

                   local telephone calls and 131+ million trunk calls.
                              As you can imagine all this business takes some 
                   handling, and the Department has only been able to accomplish 

                   this task by the introduction of many new services, new exchanges 
                   and new telephone connections.
                              Over the last ten years the number of automatic
                   exchanges have increased from about 350 to 1760. These are 

                   nearly all established in small areas, often in places where 
 r                 a Postmaster or Postmistress would not be obtainable. Over 

                   the last 10 years 1 1/2 million telephone services have been
                   installed.   During the last year an all time record was made 

                   with nearly 170,000 new connections.
                              Several important projects are at the present time
                   in the course of development.  One of these is the coaxial 

                   cable project, which is the greatest single telecommunications
                   operation ever to be undertaken in Australia. It will provide 

                   a coaxial cable from Brisbane to Lismore, a microwave radio 

                   system from Lismore to Sydney and a coaxial cable from Sydney 
                   to Melbourne.
                               if any of you have driven from Sydney to Melbourne 

                   you might at times have seen portions of this cable being laid. 

                   The Department has left landmarks in the form of the giant
                   spools which carried the cable before it was laid. Driving 

                   past from the road these spools appear to be about 8 ft. or
                   10 ft. high.   Each pair of tubes in a coaxial cable can 

                   provide over 1,200 conversations and each microwave bearer

                                            2
                   over 960 channels.  This project will he completed next year
                   and will cost    million.
                           A submarine cable is being laid between Australia and 
                   Vancouver by way of New Zealand, Fiji and Hawaii. A connection 
                   with this cable will go by landline across Canada to a new 
                   trans-Atlantic cable to be laid between Canada and the United
                   Kingdom.   This whole project will be completed in 1962. 
                   Submerged repeaters will be used to amplify the signals. 
                   This should mean that the telephone connections between Australia 
                   and the United Kingdom, the United States and Europe will all
                   be on a much more reliable basis than previously. It is not 
                   often someone wants to ring up right around the world, but when 
                   such a service is wanted it is generally wanted urgently and
                   for some important reason.  At the present moment it is
                   impossible to have a fully reliable conversation because of
                   weather conditions.  The connection might be clear one minute 
                   and gone the next, and people very often have to wait around
                   two or three days to get the connection - purely because of
•                  weather conditions.  This project will cost £stg.26M.
                           Over the next 15 years the Department will be implementing 
                   progressively its plan to enable subscriber to subscriber
                   dialling anywhere in Australia.
                            This has already been clone between some centres that
                   are next door to each other.  It is not always realised that
                   the zoning of groups in the Extended Local Service Area was 
                   an initial step in the organization of this progress.
                            Hamilton will be going across to automatic operation 
                   in the not too distant future, and this will be a further
                   important step in this direction.  Warrnambool went across 
                   to automatic operation two or three years ago.
                            Within the limits of finance that have been available 
 •                 on the national level the Department has answered challenges
                   which I indicated at the beginning of this article. Many 
                   more people have a service than before, and many people have
                   a much better service than they had before. Nevertheless, 
                   there is one factor which always seems to arouse criticism. 
                   People say - Why are most Office charges so high when the
                   Department makes such large profits? The truth of the matter 
                   is, of course, that the Department has never made large profits. 
                             It is true the Department has made profits on 
                   telephone services or some other particular service, but when
                   you take into account the depreciation of the Department's 
                   equipment that profit is wiped out. The equipment is not 
                   everlasting, expensive as it is, it has to be replaced from 
                   time to time.
                             In addition, the profits that one used to see 
                   reported from the Department never took any account of the 
                   capital expenses of the Department.
                             I have indicated that many new exchanges have been

                  established, new services installed and the Department's so
                  called profits have not paid for these.    In broad terms the 
                  Department in revenue gets about £120M or £125M. a year, but 
                  the Department actually spends £140M or £145M. a year, and 
                  therefore there is an overall drawing from consolidated
                  revenue of about £20M or £25M. This goes to pay for the
                  capital works, for improvements of different kinds that the 
                  Department must initiate.
                              If the Department charged more for its services than
                  it does now less would have to cone out of revenue.     If the 
                  Department charged less for its services more would have to 
                  come out of consolidated revenue as a direct charge on taxpayers. 
                  However, I don't think this is a real argument because most 
                  telephone subscribers are taxpayers and most taxpayers are
                  telephone subscribers.    If we want the service the Department 
                  offers we have to pay for it one way or the other.














•

