<!--start metadata-->
Title: Sinai Peacekeeping Force
Description: electoral talk
Date: 21/02/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRIME MINISTER


FOR MEDIA           21 FEBRUARY 1982
          ELECTORATE TALK


HMAS Tobruk, the Royal Australian Navy's supply ship, left 
last week for the Middle East with the eight Australian 
helicopters, and other equipment for Australia's contingent 
in the Sinai Peacekeeping Force. The troops of our main 
contingent, numbering in all about 120 men, will fly out 
later, in time to establish themselves at their posts by 
20 March. But their big starting day will be 25 April.

That is the date laid down in the Treaty of Peace between 
Israel and Egypt when the Israelis will withdraw their military 
and civil personnel from the remaining parts of Egypt's 
Sinai territory which they occupied during the 1967 Middle 
East War. That date will mark the end of a whole era in the 
tragedy of the Middle East conflict.

Australia's participation in the Peacekeeping Force means the 
association of our country with a new chapter. This new 
chapter is one which could not have come into prospect without 
the courage and determination of the leaders of Egypt and 
Israel to achieve the peace which now exists between them. 
The Peacekeeping Force is there because these two countries, 
which were at war, want it to be there to guarantee peace. 
The Peacekeeping Force will underpin the achievement of peace 
within one major area of a region which has been the most 
unstable in the world since the Second World War. The 
hatred, suspicion and bitterness which have arisen from the 
special circumstances of that region led to four wars in 
the space of one generation. These wars have threatened 
world peace. We know that any future war in that part of 
the world will seriously jeopardise the fragile stability 
overseas which is so precious to Australians. The vital 
interests of too many important countries are caught up in 
Middle East affairs for another outbreak of war there to 
leave Australia unscathed. No one can be certain about 
peace anywhere. Peace requires strenuous efforts if it is 
to be maintained. It requires constant vigilance, constant 
awareness, but above all a preparedness to make sacrifices. 
We are prepared to make such sacrifices.

Peace will fail by default if all nations wanting peace leave
the actual pursuit of it to others. It has never been part
of the Australian tradition to let this happen. In the Middle
East already Australia has contributed to a number of
peacekeeping operations. We have contributed men to the United
Nations truce supervisory organisation, and men and helicopters
to the United Nations Emergency Force in another part of the Sinai.

                       -2-

We have contributed police to the United Nations force in 
Cyprus and Australian defence force personnel to the United 
Nations military observer group in India and Pakistan.

The United Nations has a record in these peacekeeping operations 
of which it can be proud. We would have preferred that the 
Sinai Peacekeeping Force be a further part of that record. 
But faced with a Soviet veto of a United Nations mandate for 
the Peacekeeping Force - faced with a choice between a
force which could be set up outside the United Nations umbrella 
and no force at all, we were not prepared to let the Soviet 
Union achieve its obstructionist objective in the search for 
a Middle East peace. There is no reason why the United Nations 
should not at some time in the future extend its mandate to 
include this peacekeeping activity. Nor is there any reason, 
of course, why the United Nations must always be associated 
with successful international efforts to mediate in situations 
of conflict and maintain the peace.

One of the most successful episodes in recent years in resolving 
conflict and hostility between nations was the Commonwealth 
contribution to the implementation of the Lancaster House 
Agreement by which Zimbabwe attained its independence. Australia 
was a key participant in the negotiations leading to the 
Agreement. We were one of the principal contributors to the 
military force ensuring that the ceasefire led to a stable 
political settlement. We are also going to play a role, under 
Commonwealth auspices, in the training of the Ugandan army 
to help the government of Uganda overcome the disintegration 
of that country after the years of Idi Amin's destructive rule.

When the Government took its decision last October to participate 
in the Sinai Peacekeeping Force, we did so on the condition 
that there would be significant European participation. We 
were not then certain that there would be wide-ranging 
international participation, but we felt that a country like 
Australia had a unique contribution to make in starting the
ball rolling. Our decision has indeed been vindicated. 
Last October, among the major countries, only the United States 
had committed itself to participate in the Force. Since 
Australia took its decision Britain, France, The Netherlands 
and Italy, as well as New Zealand, have joined the Force. 
These later decisions have been most gratifying to the Government 
and in retospect we can see our decision as being a catalyst 
to the events which have subsequently taken place.

There again, when we took our decision in principle last year, 
fears were to be heard about the reactions of the Arab states 
which, objecting for their own reasons to the Egypt/Israel 
peace treaty, were thought to be poised to retaliate against 
Australian interests if we decided to join the Peacekeeping 
Force. In the event there has been no adverse reaction, no 
threats to embassies, no measures taken against our trade, no 
interdiction of movement by Australians in Arab countries.

•

              -3-

  What seems to have happened is that these other countries have 
  had a higher regard for the achievements that Egypt has been 
  able to make - both in regaining its territory and in establishing 
  the basis for peace with Israel - than had the critics of the 
  time. Moreover, even though these countries do not themselves 
  support the Camp David Accords, they understand very clearly 
  Australia is seeking to advance the cause of peace in the 
  Middle East.

  No one can doubt that the return of the Sinai to Egypt is 
  but one part of the complex of problems which any comprehensive 
  and lasting peace in the Middle East must solve. A solution 
  to the Palestinian issue is clearly central to the future 
  stability and peace of the Middle East. Our troops will not 
  be involved with the issues making up the dispute between 
  Israel and the Arab countries over the Palestinians' rights.

  But in our participation we are concerned that our contribution 
  should have the maximum positive influence in continuing 
  and broadening the peace process in the Middle East.
  The withdrawal of Israel from the Sinai, if it can be achieved 
  successfully, will be a large contribution to confidence among 
  the disputants. Such confidence is a vital ingredient of the 
  new chapter which will open in the Middle East after 25 April. 
  Australia will be looking to all the parties to the dispute 
  as well as the United States to ensure effective progress 
  in these other vital areas.

