<!--start metadata-->
Title: Social services, limited room to manoeuvre, a balanced budget
Description: press statement
Date: 29/08/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT

MALCOLM FRASE R s

                                                    August 29th, 1965



                         MORE TALK ABOUT THE BUDGET


               Last week I spoke about the Budget in fairly broad terms. 
Today I will make some attempt to analyse some aspects of the Budget in 
more detail.

SOCIAL SERVICES

               One of the remarkable features about the Budget is the 
way in which certain expenses rise even if the Commonwealth does nothing 
new and even if no new benefits are paid to individuals or to States. 
For example, payments from the National Welfare fund for social services 
of all kinds would have reached the mammoth figure of £465h. without any 
additional benefits being granted. This was an increase of more than 
£2014. on the previous year, and this has come about because of the larger 
number of people getting some benefit from various pensions of one kind 
or another.

               In a year in which our resources are very tightly stretched, 
and in which additional taxation has had to be imposed, largely for defence 
reasons, the Commonwealth felt unable to make a blanket increase in all
social services.  It has, however, tried to pick out those areas where 
hardship is greatest and make some effort to relieve that hardship. 
The special supplementary assistance paid to single pensioners who have 
been solely dependent upon their pension and who have been paying rent 
will be increased by 10/- to £l. per week. The eligibility tests for 
this supplementary assistance will also be relaxed so that a married couple 
will be able to take advantage of it under certain circumstances, and a 
single pensioner will be able to earn some income and still qualify for a 
part of this special allowance. The payments to pensioners for children 
who are undergoing full time education at the present time ceases when the 
children reach 18 years of age, these payments will be continued until the
child reaches the age of 21.   Widows with student children will remain 
eligible for the Class "A" widow's pension until the youngest child reaches 
21.

               The most important benefit in social services is the removal 
of the Means Test covering eligibility for enrolment in the pensioner medical
services.   All persons who are in receipt of an age, invalid, widows or
service pension or T.B. allowance will now become eligible. 120,000 
pensioners and their dependants will benefit from the extension in the 
pensioner medical service which will begin in January next year. I regard 
this as a most significant improvement in social service benefits. There 
have also been some small improvements in other social services benefits 
of one kind or another.

              As a result of these increases, payments for social services 
and repatriation benefits will be increasing not by the £20M. that I
mentioned but by a total of 108M.   On examination, I believe everyone will 
agree that the increased benefits are necessary and warranted. It is worth 
noting that the total payments from the National Welfare fund and for 
repatriation benefits absorb about two-thirds of all income tax collected 
throughout the Commonwealth.




                                                                  /2

                                   2



LIMITED ROOM TO MANOEUVRE:



               Many Commonwealth expenditures have risen in this year. 
Payments to the States have increased by £69M, very largely because 
this was the year in which a new formula was negotiated which has made 
more generous payments available to the States. The Post Office will 
be spending an additional £8M., bringing that Department's total
expenditure to £135M.   Those people who are waiting for better services; 
for more automatic exchanges or, perhaps, for a telephone where now they 
have none, would probably be the first to agree that this expenditure 
is necessary, and as we knwo Defence spending is increasing by a record 
£83M. in one year, with the prospects of even further increases during
the year or in a year's time.   In a sense., these increasing Common- 
wealth expenditures are natural; Australia is a growing and expanding
country asorbing large numbers of New Australians in each year.  This 
means that Government payments and. Government services must expand to
keep pace with a growing and vogorous population.  These demands for 
additional services and for additional expenditure are very hard to 
resist, and it tends to illustrate that there is limited room for
manoeuvre in the formation of a Budget.   This is especially so when 
there are other matters which affect our national accounts, over which
we have no control.   Matters that come into this category would include 
the prices we get for our exports; the drought inside Australia; the 
increasing Defence expenditure made necessary by the operations of war
to our north.     These all have an effect in what the Treasurer finds
he can and cannot do.    They all limit the options available to him.















































                                                                    /3

                                   3


A BALANCED BUDGET ;


              Because the Australian economy is stretched very tightly 
at the presentpoínt of time with a shortage of labour, especially in 
many secondary industries, people may have been inclined to argue that 
a Budget as nearly balanced as this one would cause inflation, inflation 
that would put up our cost structure and would also further run down
our overseas reserves.   This needs to be looked at in context. There 
are factors in this particular Budget which should help to keep us on an
even keel .   Of an increase of ££33h4 in the Defence vote, £23. will be 
sent overseas, so this is £23M. that will not add to demand inside 
Australia, and of course much of the standing Defence Vote is also spent 
overseas on new equipment.

              The drought,which has been quite severe in many parts of 
Australia will affect spending by many individuals and this again will
have a dampening effect.   The general liquidity situation is quite 
tight, and in common terms this means that the Banks are not all that
flush with funds to lend out to peo-, and that many companies may have 
to provide their own finance for any expansion programs they might have. 
I don't want to go into the technical reasons for it, but whenever our 
overseas balances run down, as they have in the last year, the consequent 
effect of that is to make money tighter and harder to borrow inside 
Australia.

              There has been a suggestion that much of the increase in 
imports last year was due to the expansion of industry and to the 
importation of capital equipment and materials that are necessary for 
industry and, if this is so, it is not necessarily a demand that will
continue at the same rate.  Furthermore, there is not the slightest 
doubt that the Government's budgetary problems were made easier by the
Arbitration Court's decision.   If a decision had been given that would 
have added £150M. or £200M. additional funds to the annual wages cheque, 
the Government might have had to act much more severely than it has in 
an effort to curb inflation and to protect overseas funds.

              While the shortage of labour in many industries, increased 
Government spending for defence and other essential purposes may tend 
to put more pressure on the economy, these other-matters I have mentioned 
will work in the opposite direction and help maintain reasonable
stability.   On balance, the Budget has been well received and Harold 
Holt, as Treasurer, should receive proper measure of credit for it.






                                000 -- --__

