<!--start metadata-->
Title: Blue Tongue
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 22/06/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        MALc OLM FRAsEx1, ~~:MBEll 


            comments on


            r3Lì:4 TOGUE.







         u will have heard that the Common we+ ith Covei wxent 






   o itod the import of all cattle, goats and sheep from every




                   Thera is one main reason why 

 rseas country as from the 31st Nay. 




this ban had to be inatituted,rand the reason is a cattle and sheep_






disease called blue tongue. I think I may be able to make the position 





clearer if Igoe little into the history of blue tongue and the damage







that it can cause to the stooì .




     Ira the beginning, blue tongue was confined to Africa. It





prevalent nearly all the time amongst the cattle population of !Trice and 






occasionally it spreads from the cattle to the sheep population with 





devastating results. The disease is not particularly harlul for cattle 






but it con affect up to 50% in the sheep population. It is quite true 





that the first ravages of the disease will rill only up to 10% to 15% of 





tLe sheep population, but the after affects of the blue tongue can make 






it neoes.::ary to destroy a further 4Q . Ttte severity of blue tongue 





on the sheep population has made it absolutely necessary for the






Commonwealth Govern ant to institute this ben•




      For quite a while blue tongue remain l c ouf im d to !q6 ric a






but seeisr+ 1 years ago it spread to the United Status of America. However 






 it was on47 3 or 4 years ego that the disease was identified in Ameriee. 









 rmeriaan cattle men hed been discovering that their cattle was showing 
 strange symptoms and there had a,L times been devastating sheep losses in 







 the U.S., but blue tongue is so difficult to identify 3tlz1 and isolate 





 that it existed in =merioa for up to 15 years before it was f inolly 





 nailed down. Following the discovery of the disease in the U.S., 





 imports of cattle from that country were banned. This was shortly after






 the last shipment of saute gertrudis to tustralia.




      Last year blue tongue was discovered in £pain and t' ort 






 for the first tin.. This means that the disease has sprees acrr sm the 





 straits of Gibraltar and could well become prevalent throughout Europe





 even though at the present time it is not present in +.ngland or other 




 European countries.



      The difficulty with blue tongue is t way it is sassed on



                          a1 strong relation-

    one animal to the ot hea r and in this way it

                                                            2     fa•

  ship to myxomatosis. This disease is passed by insects. They bite
  an infected animal and can carry the infection to another animal.
  It is passed from cattle to sheek in the same way. In addition to
  this, it is very difficult to tell if a particular beast has the disease.
  Extensive research is being undertaken in South Africa at the present
  time but knowledge on this aspect is very far from complete.
                    Furthermore, the disease can be (abrment in a zob of cattle
  ror some considerable time. They can show no outward symptoms what-
  soever but the cattle could be carrying sufficient infection to enable
  them to pass the disease to sheep through insects. It is because of
  this difficulty of detection and because of the fact thet blue tongue
  is passed frs.m one beast to another by insects that makes adequate     and
  quarantine provisions almost impossible/it opens up the danger of the
  disease being spreadundreds of miles. For instance, it is believed 
  that the disease Sot into Spain and .i:ortugal by insects being swept 
  across the Straits of Gibraltar in h storm. If that can happen once
  it can happen                   in andthere is no possible we, in which it can be
  controlled.                 That is why, even though there is no blue tongue 
  in the United Kingdom at the present tins, we have banned the import 
  of cattle and sheep from that country.
                    At the present time it should also be understood that there 
  is no cure for blue tongue and there is no way of controlling it or 
  in making animals immune. The disease must take itOhatural course. 
  It is quite clear, especially having in mind the effects on sheep, 
  that we in !%ustralis could not take any possible risk of getting tiAs 
  infection into this country. Its effects could be disastrous, in the 
  tapes true meaning of the term, for every person in Australia. That is 
  tIle first thing that must be borne in mind, but.we'must also try and 
  consider the possible effects of this ban on the future quality of our 
  stud beef and Wry herds.
                     There does not seem to be tWopinion about this question. 
  some seem to think that we can maintain the quality of our beef herds 
. indefinitely. Others believe the quality will deteriorate after a
  period of 10 or say 15 years, and in this perhaps only time will be the
  true judge.

          Nevertheless, even though at th,e present t 'hex o
 no blue tongue in ^-uetralie, I believe our scientific rc beers; 
 officers should play as active a part as possible in the research 
 of the disease, and if . it is possible supplement research being 
 undertaken in south Atria& and the U.S. My chief reason for saying 
 this is that I believe that the effects of blue tongue in Australia 
 would be so disastrous that anything that can be done to find some 
 ours for blue tongue should be done and, secondly, it it proves 
 after some period of time that we need to import further blood 
 stock into this country, we will be able to do so, only if we 4now 
 how to control and detect blue tongue.








1e/a/l9g8,

