<!--start metadata-->
Title: Possibility of an election, record of Labor Government
Description: Broadcast
Date: 15/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                SUNDAY, 15TH APRIL 311.
RADIO BROADCAST                 WEDNESDAY, 18TH APRIL 3LK 
                                THURSDAY, 19TH APRIL 3YB





Rumours are running hot around Canberra about the possibility 
of an early election next November. Those who believe an 
early election is likely to be held argue this way. They say 
that Mr. Whitlam will be able to get through this year 
without unpleasant Government measures being forced upon 
him to curb inflation, but if he waits longer than this, 
he runs the real risk of having to introduce the most drastic 
anti-inflation measures ever seen.


The budget deficit is approaching $1,000 million and it is 
argued that he would still introduce a popular budget in 
August while blaming the States and price rises for inflation. 
The States and prices would become Mr. Whitlam's scapegoat.


People who believe that Mr. Whitlam could well contemplate 
such a move continue to argue that his image stands well in 
city areas. This is hard to believe in the rural community 
which has been dealt body blow after body blow by the new 
Government, but they believe that Mr. Whitlam, on current 
polls, might win additional metropolitan seats which he 
just failed to win at the last election.


They argue that he will come out of the Federal Conference 
with a high reputation in the Labor Party - that has yet 
to be proved - and that his standing at the end of the 
year is likely to be much better with the Australian public 
than if he had gone through a period where he had attempted. 
to deal with inflation. It is argued that he will say the 
Commonwealth has not sufficient power to cope with inflation 
and that therefore he would couple the election with a bid 
for massive additional Federal powers in a referendum.


All this is interesting speculation. It would not have to 
be a double dissolution. Sir Robert Menzies once dissolved 
the House of Representatives early, merely to bring the 
election into line with the Senate. Mr. Whitlam could follow

                 2


that precedent. One thing of which I am sure is that Mr. Whitlam 
will give no hints of his own views until he has made up his 
mind and is ready to announce his intentions. No doubt the 
speculation out of Canberra will continue.

Rural industries have been given a further body blow in the 
last week or two. I had earlier reported the results of 
the redistribution which would make developing extra metropolitan 
seats smaller in number of voters than large rural seats like 
Wannon, Wimmera and Mallee. Up to ten seats could be removed 
from the rural arena by the Government's proposals, drastically 
weakening the rural voice in the Parliament. The Liberal 
Party opposed the measure vigorously.

Now, coming on top of decisions which mean there will be no 
revaluation compensation for rural industries apart from 
some sections of the fruit industry, we find that Dr. Cairns 
has announced revaluation compensation for exporting secondary 
industries. It did not get much publicity, but it indicates 
the attitude with the Government as to primary industries.

Senator Wreidt is overseas at the moment - one might have 
thought that Dr. Patterson or Al Grassby would act for him, 
but another Senator is doing that - Senator Cavanagh, the 
Minister for Works.

 the importance of all this rests in the fact that it is not 
just those directly involved in the primary industries but the 
total rural community which suffers - the country towns, the 
people who are employed in them, and everyone who lives out of 
the great cities.

If the suggestions that Mr. Whitlam has an election at the 
end of the year are correct, he does not seem to be looking 
for support from country areas.

