<!--start metadata-->
Title: Grants scheme widened - more encouragement for homeseekers
Description: For press
Date: c1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR PRESS:

               GRANTS SCHEME WIDENED —
            More Encouragement for Homeseekers
    Changes to the Federal Government's Home Savings Grant Scheme which 
recently became law will mean more encouragement for young homeseekers.
    The Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, 
said this today.
    The Government introduced the scheme in 1964, rendering young people 
eligible for a tax—free grant, depending on how much they were able to put away 
in recognised savings over a period of three years.
    The scheme was open to couples and also widowed persons with one or 
more dependent children, and there was an age limit of 36, Mr. Fraser said.
    Since the scheme began, the Commonwealth had paid out more than $74 
million to over 170,000 applicants seeking to buy or build a home.
    Maximum grant payable was $500 on savings of $1,500 or more, but 
smaller grants—down to a minimum of $10—were payable on lesser amounts saved.
    Changes to the scheme had only recently become law. These changes 
would permit more young people to qualify for a grant and allow others to 
receive larger grants by making eligible some savings which are excluded from 
the scheme at present.
    Previously the applicant for a grant was eligible only if the value 
of the home, including the value of the land involved, was not above $15,000. 
Now the limit had been raised to $17,500.
    Introducing the change, the Minister for Housing, Senator Dame 
Annabelle Rankin, said the new limit took into account the fact that homes 
cost more today. The most significant reason had been the rise in the value 
of residential land in many cities and towns.
    Another reason was that the average house being built today for 
young families was much better equipped, and was therefore a much better home 
than the home of a few years ago.
    Previously, it was necessary for the applicant to hold savings with 
a bank in accounts clearly designated as "Home Savings Accounts," or in other 
acceptable forms. This designation of savings accounts was not now mandatory.
    The changes made would extend the forms of acceptable savings to 
include money held in savings bank accounts and on fixed deposit with trading 
banks that had not been designated as Home Savings Accounts.

.-                   2

   Explaining the change, the Minister for housing said some applicants had 
   failed to have their accounts designated as required, Among them were many 
   migrants who had been unaware of the acceptable forms of saving.
   Another amendment opened the scheme to divorced persons aged less than 36 years 
   with one or more dependent children.
   The changes would apply to applicants who entered into a contract to buy or 
   build a house on or after October 27, 1969.
   The scheme had been widened another way--savings with approved credit unions 
   were now eligible, Mr. Fraser said.
   The credit union involved had to satisfy a number of conditions. Broadly, 
   these were that a credit union regularly made a significant number of loans 
   for the construction or purchase of homes, and that these loans compared in 
   size, interest terms and repayment period with those made by banks and building 
   societies.
   The Minister invited all young people who had not previously applied for a 
   grant, and who considered they might become eligible under the new conditions, 
   to apply without delay to the Commonwealth Department of Housing in their State.

