<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: Radio talk
Date: 29/08/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK                        FOR WEEK 29TH AUGUST & 2ED SEPTEMBER

          So far as Western Victoria is concerned, the most
important item in the Budget concerns the Government's decision
to make a deficiency payment to wool growers so that the average
for the entire Australian wool clip will be not less than 36c per lb.

          I know growers asked for a higher figure, but this 36c will 
 represent a very substantial improvement in returns to growers over
 last year.
          I have had a number of queries about how the scheme will
 work, and how the payment will be made. Each week the average seasonal 
 adjusted price of wool in the auction room will be calculated, then if 
 growers who sell in that week need to get a 20% increase over the 
 auction price to bring the average for the week up to the 36c, that
 20,E will be added on to each grower's return. This of course means 
 that the growers of fine wool will get a higher payment than the
 growers of coarser wool. One might get 20% added on to a basic price 
 of 25c while the other could be getting 20% added on to a price of 40e. 
 I believe this is the most equitable way of making the payment. It 
 should be remembered that the strong woolgrower also benefits from 
 the carcass which is of greater meat value and which matures more
 quickly.
          The notilonal sum mentioned in the budget to meet this 
 deficiency payment was X60 million. That would be the Commonwealth's 
 payment if the Australian average rose to 33c. On the other hand 
 if the Australian average remains at 29c or 30c something like 
 8100 million will be required. If the price falls to 25c
 much greater sums again would also be involved. The Commonwealth's 
 firm commitment is for an average of 36c for the entire Australian
 wool clip.
          There is another complication which I need to mention. 
 All wool is included in this 36c average but the Government
 decided that certain very low grade wool, mostly the K wools, 
 would not attract subsidy. I understand that these are wools 
 that sell below 10c and rate about 10% of the Australian wool clip. 
 Since these wools will not attract subsidy, it is clear that the 
 payments on the 90% of the clip that will attract subsidy must be 
 greater than would otherwise be the case, so that the average 
 for the entire clip works out at 36c. In fact, the average for 
 the 90% of the clip that attracts the subsidy will be very

 a  •
                                   2.
         nearly 39c.

                   Wool sold privately or through Economic Wool producers 
         will also attract the subsidy providing the appropriate
         arrangements are made. Let me mention briefly one or two
          other matters that refer to wool.

                   Additional sums have been advanced to the Australian 
          Wool Commission for its normal operations and for the Commission's
          price averaging plan.  The Government will be continuing to 
          support the Australian Wool Commission in its reserve price 
          operation on the same basis as in the past seasòn.

•                  The Rural Reconstruction programme was originally 
          a $100 million scheme over four years. As a private member 
          I indicated that I thought that this was a starting price and 
          that the important thing was to get the Scheme operating 
          sensibly. $40 million has been provided this year for
          rural reconstruction and a further $10 million has been 
          provided to the Development Bank for farm build up purposes. 
          Under the Marginal Dairy Farms Reconstruction proposals over 
          $11 million will be made available to the States this year. 
          Other payments to the rural industries, such as support 
          for the dairy industry will of course be continuing. The 
          butter and cheese bounties will be nearly S40 million this 
          year - it is worth noting that butter has been more highly
411       priced on the London market than it has for very many years 
          and export prices for other dairy products have been good.




                                    o0o....

