<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry, conscription
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 19/03/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                     3HA Sunday 19 March 
        TEXT OF BROADCAST BY         3YB Thursday 23 March 
        THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.3LK Tuesday 21 March





              In recent weeks, there has been a good deal of 
        optimism about the future of the wool industry, prompted 
        mainly by the encouraging movements of wool prices at auctions 
        throughout Australia.

              As a wool grower and a Member of the Government, I 
        have naturally been delighted to see the demand for wool 
        improve to the extent that prices have surpassed the 36 cents 
        a pound minimum guaranteed by the Commonwealth under the 
i       deficiency payments scheme.

              This scheme and the Commonwealth's commitment to the 
        Australian Wool Commission could have cost the Government well 
        over $200 million this year if prices had not strengthened. 
        But that was the extent to which the Commonwealth was prepared 
        to go to maintain a great Australian industry.

              However, this is not the end of the matter just
        because prices rise from the disastrous to the mediocre. Only 
        a few days ago, the Commonwealth Government gave an undertaking 
        which emphasises the positive nature of our concern for the 
        future of wool. The Primary Industry Minister announced that 
•       the Government would study thoroughly the proposal from the 
        wool industry for acquisition and marketing of the entire 
        Australian wool clip.

              We cannot say at this early stage what the outcome of 
        the Government's deliberations will be. But one thing is sure. 
        The Government will consider the proposal fully aware of the 
        objectives of those putting it forward. Behind the proposal 
        lies more than a desire to implement an acquisition and
        marketing plan. There is a realisation that for wool to compete 
        successfully with synthetics, there must be established a modern 
        selling system. The cumbersome process that now exists must be 
        streamlined to make it easier and more convenient for the
        textile manufacturer to obtain the supplies of wool that he wants.


                                               .../2

         One of the great advantages of the producer of 
     synthetic fibres is his ability to tailor his supply to the 
     manufacturer's demand and to deliver his product free of the 
     kind of procedures the wool producer faces. As wool growers 
     and_ people whose livelihoods are to a considerable extent 
     bound up in the wool industry, we must consider these factors. 
     We must look beyond the farm gate, as they say. In considering 
     the wool industry's acquisition and marketing proposal, the 
     Commonwealth Government is playing its part in this vital matter.




         Last week, I talked about the rule of law in our 
•    community and its general acceptance by the vast majority of 

     citizens as a cornerstone of our democratic society.

         I discussed the issue because the A.L.P. Leader,
     Mr. Whitlam, had challenged this fundamental principle with his 
     declaration that 'draft dodging is not a crime'.

         Mr. Whitlam then went on to justify his statement by 
     saying that an A.L.P. Government would abolish national service. 
     He took the incredible view that it is not a crime to break a 
     law that the Opposition intended to change if it had the 
     opportunity.

         As you are no doubt aware, this whole issue stemmed from 
•    the A.L.P.'s endorsement of Mr. Barrie Johnston for the Victorian 
     electorate of Hotham in the next Federal election. Mr. Johnston 
     is being sought by Commonwealth Police for failing to comply with 
     the National Service Act. He recently addressed a Labor Party 
     meeting behind closed doors.

         From the widespread objections that the whole issue 
     generated, especially in view of Mr. Whitlam's professional 
     standing as a barrister, it would be assumed that the A.L.P. would 
     realise its mistake and attempt to extricate itself from its 
     predicament.

         Precisely the opposite occurred, and gave the lie to 
     the view that the Party's Victorian Branch had been restructured 
     to make it more moderate. It demonstrated that the influence 
     of the left wing within the Labor movement in Victoria is as

     virulent as ever it was. On the eve of the A.L.P.'s Federal 

     Executive Meeting in Adelaide, the former secretary of the Victorian

                 3.


    A.L.P., Mr. Hartley, said he would put a proposal seeking full support
    for Mr. Johnston, their candidate for Hotham. Mr. Hartley
    and Mr. Hawke, the president of the Australian Council of
    Trade Unions, are Victoria's two delegates to the 18-member
    Federal Executive.

        The next day, it was reported that Mr. Hartley and 
    Mr. Hawke had abandoned the Victorian branch's plan to seek 
    Federal Executive endorsement for Mr. Johnston.

        In summary, the whole issue demonstrates two things - 
    first, that the Victorian Branch of the Party gives full support 
    to Mr. Whitlam's statement that draft dodging is not a crime, 
•   and second, that the Victorian Executive of the A.L.P. is as 
    left-wing oriented as it ever was, despite the alleged
    reorganisation.



        This is not a once-only casual error. It was a 
    deliberate act of the Victorian Branch of the A.L.P. to
    select Mr. Johnston. It was their deliberate act to give 
    him continued support. It was Mr. Whitlam's deliberate
    statement which indicated he regarded draft dodging as not a 
    crime. It served only to remind us of the press statement he 
    issued on September 23, 1970, which could have led to mutiny 
    among Australian forces if it had been followed by our troups.
•
        How Mr. Whitlam believes the community can operate 
    on that kind of basis I just cannot understand. This sort of 
    advice and this sort of action by people or organisations who 
    ought to be regarded as responsible does much to undermine the 
    whole basis of our society.

        It is worth recalling that originally those who were 
    opposing national service were opposing it because it was
    service for overseas, including Vietnam. It has become quite 
    plain that that was merely a front. The opposition within the 
    Labor Party is opposition to National Service of any kind. 
    Australians generally understand that in this country there are 
    obligations as well as rights. Mr. Whitlam and his colleagues, 
    by their actions, are doing much to undermine this.


              -00000000000-

