<!--start metadata-->
Title: Report on a visit to the United Nations
Description: United States visit 1964 - press statement
Date: 26/06/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                            ~•







       PRESS STATE1ENT:



                                                      June 26th,1964




               MAICOLN FRASER REPORTS ON A VISIT TO THE UNITED NATIONS 




       TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL :




                  Before returning to Washington I visited the United Nations 

       for some days and spoke with members of our Mission and with people from 
       other countries. During this time I was fortunate enough to be able to 

       sit in on the work of the Trusteeship Council, the Committee of twenty- 
       four and the Security Council. The Security Council was discussing the 

       race problems that have arisen once again in British Guiana, here the 
       main difficulty seems to be the animosities that have occurred between 
       the Indians and the African people of that country. Full independence 

       for the territory of British Guiana is prevented by the inability of these 

       two people to get on together and to go forward in a mutual development 
       towards self-government.


       NEW GUINEA :

•
                  The general opinion amongst many people I spoke to was that the 

       work that Australia is doing in New Guinea is very greatly respected. Of 
       course it is true that the Russians and some other Communist countries 
       attack us in all the conventional terms as being a Colonial power, but the 

       feeling seems to be that this is not taken all that seriously because the 

       problems that Australia is facing and the people of New Guinea are facing

       are well recognised t Australia is not a Colonial power in the traditional 
       sense. For example, many countries in the past were Colonial powers because 
       of the investment and rewards that they were able to get out of those 
       countries. This has never been so with Australia. The very large sums 

       that the Australian taxpayers put into New Guinea each year are put there 
       with no thought of return. This is no investment that is going to give a 

       monetary reward, it is done to build up a viable and stable community which 
       will be able to stand on its own feet. The reward that Australia will get 
       will be to see the success of its efforts - an independent,proud and prosper- 

       ous New Guinea, but this will be a long time off.



                  I heard spokesmen from the indigenous people of New Guinea 
•      putting their point of view to the Trusteeship Council. One in particular, 
       who had written a most able speech, said that the people of New Guinea wanted 

       Australia to stay until their work was done. He did not want people or third 

       parties trying to force the rate of political development too much because he 
       recognised the difficulty of implanting democracy in a Territory of this kind. 
       He seemed to put the view that the people of New Guinea and Australia should 

       be able to choose their own time table for further democratic development and 

       this, of course, is the only sensible conclusion.



                  The debate in the Trusteeship Council was also well timed because 
       the opening of New Guinea's first fully franchised Parliament was taking place 

       in the same week. This is a very large step forward in the development of 

       independent political institutions in the territory of New Guinea, and this 
       is again recognised by the Trusteeship Council. It may be recognised more in 
       private than in public because there are probably people here who are prepared 
       in private to say or to recognise-the work that Australia is doing, but because 

       of political reasons at home or because of international political reasons in 

       a country like Africa they may be unprepared to give recognition to this in 
       public. This feeling does mean that a great majority of countries don't 

       appear to give Australia too much trouble over New Guinea - the worth of our 
       work is recognised. This does not mean that we should be complacent. or 
       slacken our efforts - Australia will not do this.





                                                                 i2

                    2



    NAURU 



          The Nauruan debate was also interesting and a distinguished 
    representative of the Nauruan people was present to answer questions. 
    I learnt more about Nauru than I had known before.

          I think it is well known that the 2,000 Nauruans will have to 
    be re-settled on some other territory when the phosphate deposits are 
    exhausted in twenty or twentyfive years time, and there have been negotiations 
    between the Australian Government and the Nauruan people on the terms and 
    conditions under which they would like re-settlement. For example, these 
    people were offered full Australian citizenship on the mainland but this 
    offer was refused by the Nauruan Leaders. I had been unable to under- 
    stand the refusal of this offer because most people would have thought it 
    a pretty reasonable one. However, when you look at the background and 
    history of these people the reason is not difficult to find. The 2,000 
    people are nearly all related to each other. Each Nauruan feels a 
    responsibility for all his friends and for all the people of Nauru. They 
    want to keep their own identity and they are fearful of losing it, there- 
    fore they want some territory where they can maintain this and live as one
    community. This is a Simple desire but it is one that we can understand. 
411 Largely as a result of this the Australian Government has followed its 
    original offer with full citizenship on the mainland with an offer o± their 
    own development of their own community being established on Curtis Islaid 
    off the Queensland Coast. This is potentially a very valuable piece of 
    land about twenty times the s ize of the present island of Nauru. Details 
    of the transfer and of the conditions of the transfer, if and when it takes 
    place, have not yet been worked out and finally agreed upon between the 
    Nauruan people and the Australian Government, but I think it likely that 
    agreement will take place.

          Even if the phosphate deposits were not becoming exhausted on 
    Nauru the people would have to be re-settled somewhere or some of them 
    would have to leave because their numbers are expanding and they have 
    in fact outgrown the very small island of Nauru that they now possess. 
    This is a difficult human problem. The Australian Government is 
    approaching the position in a generous fashion and I hope and believe that 
    it will continue to do this.

.   SOUTHERN RHODESIA

          The other matter that I heard discussed in the United Nations was 
    the problem of Southern Rhodesia. Here we have a white minority of about a 
    quarter of a million people'denying the vote and any kind of political right 
    to something like three million Africans. Southern Rhodesia looks at 
    present as though it is going on the same road as South Africa. However, the 
    complications arise because Southern Rhodesia, although it has been largely 
    self-governing for nearly forty years, has never been given full independence 
    from the United Kingdom and therefore various organs of the United Nations 
    try to bring pressure on the United Kingdom to force the Southern Rhodesian 
    Government to widen the franchise. Power of the United Kingdom in this matter 
    could be pretty limited. It is not impossible that the Southern Rhodesian 
    Government might unilaterally declare its independence from the United Kingdom 
    then, if it was able to maintain its own unity in its own country, the United 
    Kingdom would be faced with the alternatives of recognising the decision. in 
    which case its influence to work some rights for the Africans would be lost, 
    or opposing by military means such a unilateral declaration. This would be 
    a pretty difficult choice and the United Kingdom clearly doesn't want to be 
    forced into the situation of having to make this choice.



                                   /3

~








                                    ~-  3

                 I spoke to the Chairman of the Committee of 24. This is the 
      Committee established by the General Assembly of the United Nations to try 
      and hasten the process of de-colonization. The Committee is at the moment 
      giving most of its attention to Southern Rhodesia and is very concerned 
      about this. The Chairman was a likeable person, a French speaking African, 
      and he had just returned from a visit to the United Kingdom to speak with 
      Mr. Duncan Sands and others on this particular problem. He believes that 
      this question will be raised at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference 
      being held very shortly, and it could present some difficulties to the 
      Prime Ministers at that Conference.

                 The position taken by the present Government of Southern Rhodesia
      is basically indefensible. It appears contrary to everything that Australia 
      stands for and works for in New Guinea for example, but it may not be easy to 
      get the Government of Southern Rhodesia to alter its views and widen its 
      franchise.

•
                                       o 0o

