<!--start metadata-->
Title: Czechoslovakia
Description: radio talk
Date: c1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


r






               August 21, 1968, is now written down indelibly as a day
        of infamy. On that day troops and tanks of the Soviet Union, supported
        by forces from East Germany, Poland, Bulgaria and Hungary, marched into
        Czechoslovakia.
               The iron heel of oppression had arrived, to crush the
        stirrings of freedom that had been blossoming under the rule of
        Alexander Dubcek. f-iI was an act of brazen aggression that brought
        down almost universal condemnation on the heads of Russia and her
        Wars .w!'act ,satellites. It was a day of shock that will have its
               ns on the international scene for a long time.
               The brutal repression of the Czechs served notice on the
        countries of the non-Communist world that a new analysis, a new account-
        ing had to be taken of the apparent harmony that had begun to
        characterise Soviet-West ]ielations in recent times. The signs of
        potential rs& 4 e+ineirt- had emerged in areas of detente,
        principally with U.S.-Soviet negotiations /oth countries worked
        hard toward the treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. And
        there was the outer space treaty - the pact on the principles
        governing the activities of countries in the exploration and use
        of outer space, including the moon.ÉThere were hopeful signs.
        Some observers were hopeful to a greater extent than others. They
        sought to translate the signs into a concrete reality of general harmony
        and trust.
               The swift Red thrust into the heart of Czechoslovakian
        freedom has now transformed the situation. Those who were preparing
        to swear that the Russians had renounced the use of force in its
        relationships with its satellites and in its dealings with other
        Communist regimes were brought to a rude awakening.[he scales fell
        from many eyes throughout the world. The Western countries decried this
        patent act of aggression and almost without exception the Communist
        parties throughout the world condemned the illegal crushing of the Czechs.
               For the brave Czechs, the light of freedom had been
        snuffed out once more For nearly 30 years the shadow of a dictatorial
        power has loomed over eir land, since the radio in Nazi Germany
        exultantly announced on March 15, 1939 - 'Czechoslovakia has ceased
        to exist. ' 1945 the Red armies had ended Nazi rule, and it was
        but three years later that the country was plunged into the darkness

                        -2—

of Stalinist oppression by the Communist political coup of 1948.
            It was not that the recent changes inside Czechoslovakia, 
proposed by Dubcek, were revolutionary — or that they presented a 
threat to the Soviet or her Warsaw Pact allies. cbcek sought no 
more than to bring about an increase in the freedoms of his people, 
to allow them to speak out without reprisal, to give the press and 
other news media greater freedom of expression. There followed 
the curious conferences at Cierna and Bratislava with the Soviet 
leaders, and everyone believed that while the Moscow rulers had 
drawn a line somewhere, nevertheless the Czechoslovakian experi- 
ments might to a large degree go forward.
         / ut this was not to be. Messrs. Brezhnev and Kosygin
and their colleagues of the Warsaw Pact countries became alarmed at 
the liberal Dubcek reforms, and in a classic doublecross, sent their
armies racing to the Czech capital. heir action triggered massive 
abhorrence throughout the world. The Australian Parliament deplored 
the act of aggression from both sides of the House. The Prime 
Minister, Mr John Gorton, dispensed with the contempt it deserved 
the spurious Soviet claim that its action had been in response to 
an appeal from 'the Government of Czechoslovakia'. And in the 
United States, President Johnson summed up the naked brutality of 
the Communist swoop. It had, he said, shocked the conscience of the 
world.

       ~~
   111-7e-2-1,1--%,. 141,-1. 2


        About the time that Czechoslovakian freedom was being 
crushed, a conference of some 500 people from the great universities 
of the Commonwealth was meeting in Sydney. jTheir designs, in pursuit 
of enlightenment and understanding in the field of higher education, 
were in stark contrTst to the savage repression of freedom of thought in 
Czechoslovakia. This was the Tenth Commonwealth Universities Congress, 
which I had the honour of addressing.
        While I spoke of other matters, I was able to put to the 
conference some thoughts which had occupied my mind for some time. /(I-. 
approached these ideas by remarking that we need to ask ourselves 
why our physical power — including the power to destroy civilisation 
as we understand it — had grown so much, and why our capacity for 
utilising that power for proper purposes seemed no better than when 
our physical power was infinitesimal compared to what it has now


reached. Tere has been a tremendous explosion of knowledge in the
physical and biological sciences that affects us at practically every 
turn. It seems to me, with few exceptions, that advances in other 
areas of knowledge seem to make comparatively little impact. (hese 
were the questions I put — What other great achievement is there in 
the social sciences ... what advances have there been in political 
philosophy? f Some advances in their own fields have had a significant 
effect on the condition of our society. But where are the advances 
which give prospects of a better understanding of our own community, 
and of understanding between different communities?
       The question was this — how do you make the advance in 
social science and in political philosophy th-t is commensurate with 
the advance of knowledge and power of the physical and biological
sciences. ess we can succeed in this I fear the prospects for 
the human race are not as bright as many would hope.

