<!--start metadata-->
Title: Snowy Mountains
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 18/05/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        MALCOLM FRASLE„ MEMBNR FOR WANNON
            reports on
          SNOWY MOUNTAIINS.

     In the last weak of the autumn session, the Commonwealth 
Parliament ratified the Snowy Mountains Agreement between the States of 
New South Wales and Victoria and the Commonwealth. You will probably 
remember that earlier this year the State of Victoria also ratified this 
Agreerent. However, the responsibility for the work has been undertaken 
solely by the Commonwealth rind both major political Parties can claim an 
equal share of the credit that is d110 to the ariginators of the scheme.
     The Snowy :ountains Authority was set up just before the 
Chifley Government was beaten in 1949 and since then the present Common- 
wealth Government has carried on the scheme as originally envisaged. 
Indeed, in many respects, it has hastened the general project. Many 
people look on the Snowy Mountains scheme as something that will benefit 
our children mat but not ourselves. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. By 1959 160,000 k,w, will be available to the power users of 
Now South 'iiales and Victoria mad by 1960 this figure will have reached 
320,000 k.w. By the end of 195 also huge quantities of additional watei. 
will be made available for irrigation from the Murray and Murrumbidgee 
'Rivers. Eventually 2,000,000 acre feet and 3,000,000 k.w. of power will
be available.
     In the last two or three yews, besides being Australia's 
greatest developmental project, the Snowy Mountains is also turning into 
something else -- a spectacular scenic resort. 30,000 Australians a year 
now visit the Snowy Mountains to see what is being done and anyone who 
has visited the scheme cannot help coming away greatly impressed.
     You may have seen in the papers in the last few weeks reports 
that the South Australian Government is issuing a writ to try and obtain 
greater benefits from the scheme. This has apparently been done very 
largely because South 2Alstralia feels that her rights have not been 
adequately protected. Although South Australia does not and cannot 
legally or logically share in the Snowy Mountains scheme itself, it does 
share in the waters of the Murray which run out to sea in South Australia.

It is possible to sympathise with south _ustraliats fears in this respect 
because a great deal of her industrial and agricultural development is 
dependent upon tho waters of the Murray. But it is also true that up 
to the present time South Australia has not used a fraotiòn of the waters 
that are available to her at present, and secondly, it is true that when 
the Snowy Mountains scheme is complete there will be greater additional 
quantities of water available to South ustralia at no cost to her. This 
will be a direct result of tho better regulation of the Elver which will 
be made possible by the storages and the dots in the mountains.
          I think the real reason for the :outh Australian Government 
issuing a writ is that ,outh ustralia wants some share of the additional 
waters that will be made available but it is hard to see the logical 
reason for.itipy„ as the suers that are going to be diverted into the 
Murray - and this applies especially to the snowy hiver - rise in New 
South Wales and flow out to the sea through Victoria. f.,uch rivers, quite 
clearly, have nothing whatever to do with South Australia and there is no 
reason why South Australia should share in the use of those waters.
However, South Aistraliu has taken this course and so presumably the 
battle will be fought out in the courts. It is a pity that a scheme of tide 
kind which is the greatest that has over boon undertaken in Australia 
should be challenged in this way, The Commonwealth and the two States 
of Victoria and New South Vales and all political Parties in these States
have supported the agreement to the hilt. The two major political 
Parties have both played a notable and worthy pert in the execution of
the Bohemia.
          Indeed, the Snowy Mountains Scheme is an example of the best
possible kind of Government activity. The Government goes in and 
builds the dams and the tunnels to carry the water. It erects the power 
stations. It does all the things icach private petliple could never 
possibly do for themselves because they recuire the kind of resources 
which only Governments can have, but when the initial work has been 
done the Government steps aside and says : "This water is available for 
you to use, on your farms and your properties, for irrigation. It is 
to be used by yo0 to make you more secure in times of drought:

              3

Or, alternatively, they say : "The power that we generate (which 
is incidentally cheaper than the power that is at present consumed 
in Victoria or New South Wales) will be used by individuals or by 
factories or by companies in pursuit of their awn activities." 
The Commonwealth, having carried out the initial work* steps aside 
to make way for private individuals so that they may play their 
part in adding to the development of Australia. This, as I have 
said, is the best kind at Government activity, a partnership 
between the Government and the people in which both have their true 
and proper part and in which they act as complements to each other.
     When I first came into the Federal Parliament I said 
that the national development of our country was the most important 
objective facing Australians. This is true, because on our 
national development depends the question of our own survival as 
a nation. I certainly hope that as more resources become 
available and that as the Snowy Mountains scheme nears completion 
we will find the Commonwealth and the States entering into other 
partnerships to open up other areas of Australia which, at the 
present time, present a challenge to the Australian people.

