<!--start metadata-->
Title: Interstate Commission Bill, Senate powers
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 2/11/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   Leader of the Opposition


   & MEMBER FOR WANNON, MR MALCOLM FRASER


                      SUNDAY NOVEMBER 2, 1975 

                      THURSDAY NOVEMBER 6, 1975


            ELECTORAL TALK






•  The Senate has for three years been the safeguard of Australian's 
   freedom.

   The decision of the people, reaffirmed in May last year that the 
   Opposition Parties should have a majority in the Senate has 
   prevented a series of authoritarian bills becoming law at 
•  the expense of individual freedom and of democracy in Australia.

   The bills hide their hard facts behind dull phrases.

   If Labor were to gain control of the Senate those bills would be 
   rushed through and the structure of tyranny erected.

   One of the worst is the Interstate Commission Bill, which was 
   pushed through the House of Representatives in 53 minutes.
   It alone contains enough muscle to create a totalitarian Australia.

   The bill purports to set up a Commission to regulate transport 
•  between the states. But the Commission's authority would be vast.
   Its power to investigate would be unrestricted, it would be able to 
   make orders which would over-ride both Commonwealth and State 
   laws.

•  Firms which disobey the Commission would be liable to be fined 
   $50,000 a day and individuals $10,000 a day.

   Newspaper cartoonists and commentators should be extremely wary. 
   The fine for insulting a member of the Commission would be $1,000 
   or three months gaol.

   In short, the bill contains terrifying powers of coercion and 
   punishment.

   Another government bill blocked by the Senate was an amendment 
   to the Television and Broadcasting Act. This bill proposes to 
   set up a television and broadcasting authority with power to do all 
   the things necessary for its effective functioning. These are 
   polite words for doing whatever it likes.






   Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600

~•




                     -2-

    This television authority would be able to dictate the nature 
    and content of all television programmes, from drama to 
    political commentary and news.

    It is an insidious and dangerous piece of legislation opening 
    the way to censorship and news management. It would take from 
    Parliament the power it now has to scrutinize the present 
    broadcasting control board.

    Another so-called reform of the Whitlam government is the Electoral 
    Bill, which is supposed to restrict campaign expenditure by
•   political parties. However, it is heavily weighted in favour 
    of the Labor Party, and against the Opposition, which would be 
    lucky to survive it.

    The Electoral Bill would limit candidates' spending during elections. 
    However it exempts payments made by branches, divisions or other 
    parts of a party. Unions which are affiliated to the Labor Party
41, and are thus parts of the Labor Party could give money which 
    would not be counted as expenditure by an ALP candidate. However, 
    business firms, which are not part of the Liberal Party or any 
    other party would be drastically restricted in their donations.

    A party which overspends could be fined $2 million and its 
    office holders $10,000 whether or not they were aware of 
    any overspending in the terms of this bill.

    Now let us look at the Purchasing Commission which at first
    glance just seems another example of the Whitlam government's 
    desire for bureaucratic tidiness.

•   The Purchasing Commission would take over the job of procuring
    goods, works and services for all federal departments.

    That sounds simple, but its massive scale gives it immense
    purchasing power, far outstripping the economic weight of the
    biggest companies in Australia.
• 
    With the government now occuping 31% of the economy such a 
     Commission would enable the government to bend and manipulate 
     all sections of the community. It could coerce suppliers and 
     cripple or bankrupt firms which don't promote government 
     policies.

     Like the other bills, the Purchasing Commission Bill is about 
     power - capricious, ideological power over your money and 
     your life.




                                        .../3

               -3-


   The Whitlam government wants to set up its own national 
   police force, a proposal condemned by the Victorian Council 
   of Civil Liberties as a major threat to civil liberties.

   But you cannot have a totalitarian state without a national 
   police force to push the people around. The Whitlam government 
   wants its own national police for this purpose.

   These are only some of the bills held up in the Senate.

   The whole thrust of the government in the last three years
•  have been to establish arbitrary powers and to take to 
   itself additional authority to govern by regulation.

   The people of Australia can be grateful to the Senate. 
   It is the major bastion in Australia today against the 
   Whitlam assault on their freedoms.

•  Without the Senate, all the powers I have mentioned would 
   already be law.


               000000000







•





•

