<!--start metadata-->
Title: British proposal to apply for membership of European common market
Description: radio talks
Date: 7/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR PRESS


    The following is the text of a Press Statement issued 
in London and Geneva:

    BRITISH PROPOSAL TO APPLY FOR MEMBERSHIP
        OF EUROPEAN COMMON MARKET

    (Statement by the Rt. Hon. John McEwen, 
    Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for 
         Trade and Industry)



    Commenting on Mr. Wilson's announcement that Britain 
proposed to ledge an application for membership of the
European Common Market, Mr. McEwen, the Deputy Prime Minister 
of Australia and Minister for Trade and Industry, said today: 
"I accept as a declaration made in good faith the often-repeated 
words of Mr. Wilson and the British Prime Ministers who preceded 
him that essential Commonwealth interests will be safeguarded 
but I, with all other Australians, must wait with real anxiety 
to learn what arrangements the British Government believes it 
can achieve which would avoid seriously affecting the course 
of trade between Australia and Britain.
    "It is obvious", Mr. McEwen went on, "that if Britain 
enters the European Common Market, there will be most important 
economic consequences for trade - both ways - between Britain 
and Australia.
    "Australia is Britain's second largest export market.
    "Last financial year Britain's exports to Australia 
totalled $A750 million.
    "Britain's special position in the Australian market 
has been created and protected by preference in Australia's 
tariffs on imports.
    "Of the SA750 million worth imported by Australia 
from Britain, as much as 90 per cent received preferential 
treatment in the Australian tariff.
    "That is to say 90 per cent/of British exports were 
enabled to enter Australia at lower rates of duty than applied 
to imports of the same products from other counties.

             2.
     "In many cases duties paid by other overseas countries 
were 15 per cent higher than paid on British Products.
     "It was not uncommon for the rate of duty paid by 
other suppliers to be as much as 30 per cent higher than the 
rate on British goods.
     "Britain therefore has a very big stake in the 
Australian market.
     "Australia also has a big stake in the British 
market. Last year Australia's exports to Britain totalled 
t,A475 million. More than 65 per cent of Australia's exports 
are receiving preferences and these exports have been growing.
     "Last year some 80 per cent of Australia's export 
income from butter, 65 per cent of income from canned fruits 
and 50 per cent from sugar was earned from sales to Britain.
     "0f Australia's total earnings from exports of 
apples and pears and dried vine fruit, 50 per cent came 
from sales to Britain as did 30 per cent of our total export 
 income from beef and veal.
     "The development of most of these industries, 
 obviously geared to supply the British market, has been 
based upon contractual arrangements with the British which have 
 stood virtually unchanged since 1931.
     "The Australian Government attaches the greatest 
 importance to the achievement of some means of sustaining 
 such industries and their dependent communities.
     "In 1962, when an application by Britain to join 
 the European Common Market was under consideration, the 
 Prime Minister of Australia, Sir Robert ;Ienzies, said, 
 'We are not going to wander away from these industries. 
 No industry like dried fruits or canned fruits need suppose 
 for one moment that we are just going to dump it under 
 those circumstances.'
     "British Prime Ministers have stated on many 
 important occasions over the last few years that British
 entry into the Common Market is conditional on the safeguarding 
 of essential Commonwealth interests.

                  3.
         "Mr, Wilson has repeatedly stated that Britain 
    is ready to enter the European Economic Community, provided
    essential British and Commonwealth interests are safeguarded.
         "Just how these essential Commonwealth interests 
    will be safeguarded has not been indicated.
         "When previous negotiations between Britain and 
    the European Economic Community for British entry broke down, 
    only two proposals had been produced - a phasing out of
    preferences and international commodity agreements covering 
    the big bulk commodities.
         "The phasing out of preferences on Australian exports 
    to Britain offers little comfort to Australian export industries 
    which have built up the greater part of their total export
    trade on the basis of contractual arrangements defining their 
    right of entry to the British market.
         "It is true that Australian total trade has diversified. 
    However, for example, a good sale of iron ore to Japan does 
    not help the Dairy .industry if that industry loses the market 
li  that is so predominantly important.
         "The other proposal was for a number of international 
     commodity agreements. In 1962, during the exploratory 
     negotiations on Britain joining the E.2.C., a communique 
     issued by the parties to the negotiations stated that the 
     changed circumstances of exporters of bulk foodstuffs and 
     raw materials which would occur if the Community were substantially 
     enlarged, could and should be safeguarded by a number of world 
     commodity agreements."
         Mr. McEwen said, "Because the Kennedy Round is in 
     train and because countries which would benefit from commodity 
     agreements have offered to pay in tariff concessions for 
     those benefits, there could never be a better time than now 
     to negotiate world commodity arrangements.
         "Because it is Britain's intention now to take a 
     step which would so disrupt the traditional pattern of bulk 
     commodity trade, no country is more obligated than Britain 
     to press now for world commodity agreements.
         "The objective to be aimed at is clear.

             4.
     "Less than a year ago, at a Conference of Trade 
Ministers convened by Mr. Wilson, the British Government 
agreed to support world commodity agreements which would 
assure remunerative prices to efficient producers.
     "Someone has to take the initiative and no country 
is better fitted to take the initiative than Britain as an 
historic world trader in the bulk commodities.
     "G.A.T.T. recognises that trading arrangements such 
as common markets and free trade areas have a place in world 
trading, but only provided that the opportunities for world 
trade are increased by the new trading arrangements.
     "If the formation of a new association or enlargement 
of an existing association leads to a diminution of trading 
opportunities, then this is clearly contrary to the purpose 
of the G.A.T.T.
     "Nothing could restrict world trading opportunities 
more than if Britain, the world's major food importer, were 
to move inside the same wall of protective devices as currently 
surrounds the Common Market.
     "If these. protective devices were not modified on 
Britain's entry, then trade between member countries of the 
enlarged Common Market would be freed, but at the Same time, 
the rest of the world would be cut off from its traditional 
and greatest food cutlet", Mr. McEwen said.








Canberra, A.C.T. 
May 7th, 1967

