<!--start metadata-->
Title: 26th Parliament
Description: press statement
Date: 26/02/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               February 26th, 1967

    ÿhi s last wek th. 26th Parliament assembled for 
the first tia' . It was cuite a different Parliament from 
the old one.
    In all twenty old faces have departed from the 
case of Representatives and there were twenty new members - 
17 new ones for the Liberal Party and three for the Country 
ar „-r. There was , also one new member for the Labor Party in 
a by-election earlier last year.
    But the difference in the Parliament is not just a 
difference in numbers between the parties. In the Liberal 
Party, for example, out of a membership of sixty-one, only 
seventeen were elected before 1955. Only one was elected 
before the last world war - the Prime Minister - who first 
entered the Federal Parliament in 1935. After this the next 
largest increase in the Liberal Party ranks occurred in 1949 
when fifteen new members were elected. This large number was 
partly due to the re-distribution and also due of course, to 
the large swing to the present Government Parties at that time.
    Later in 1952 Harry Turner won his scat in New South 
';Vales. There were a large number of new members again in 1955 
and since then there has been a fairly constant flow of new 
Liberals coming into the Parliament. Two came in in 1956; 
one in 1958; three in 1960; six in 1965; four in 1964 and 
seventeen last year.
    This large number is due to the fact that a'si gn:ificant 
number of Liberals, ten in all, resigned and also to the fact 
that seven seats were won from the Labor Party.
                         /2

  •
•



                   -2-



            Out of the Country Party's membership of twenty-one 

       only six we -e elected to the Parliament before 1955. In the 

       country _ ._._. ':.y the longest serving member is the Leader - John 

       McEwen - who entered the Federal Parliament in 1934. He was 

       joined by Charles Adernann, the Minister for Primary Industry, 

       in 1940, and then by Winton Turnbull in 1946. Winton Turnbull 

       is quite well known in Western Victoria and very well known in 

       the Malice.

            In recent years the Country Party has also had a con- 

       stant flow of new members. Three in 1958, one in each of the 

       two f ollowing years, five in 1963; one in 1965 and three last 

       year.

            Of the membership of the two Government Parties only 

       twenty-three out of a total membership of 82 entered the 

       Parliament before 1955, thus an overwhelming proponderance of 

       new members have entered the Government Parties in the last 

       decade. This is vitally important from at least two points 

       of view. It means that we are getting new thought, new vigour 

       and new interest in the Government. Parties and it also means 

       that there is a constant supply of new material for the 

       Ministry. This can best be shown from the fact that of the 

       present members of the House of Representatives only the Prime 

       Minister and John Mc±wen were in the original Menzies' ministry 

       in 1949. There has been a tremendous turnover in the Ministry.i
              4
       This again keeps the Government alive and vigorous and is a 

       completely factual repudiation to the charge that is sometimes 

       made that the-Government is an old one. It is true that the 

       .same Government Parties have held-the reins of Government for 

       a long time, but the people composing the Ministry from those 

       Parties have largely entered the Ministry in more recent times.



                                   /3

-3-
The Labor Party is in a slightly different position.
went of its present membership entered the House before 1955
and 21 have come into_it in the years since then. So while
.2Y of the Governm_nt membership entered the House before
155 a .fraction under 5d of Labor Party membership entered in
those earlier years. This is one of the reasons why the Opposition
has had some difficulty in establishing new ideas and a new approach
to the problems of Australia.
This change becomes quite marked when you look at it
from a personal point of view. In the Liberal Party 33 members
•
have entered the Parliament since I did, and in terms of years
of service in the Parliament I am in the oldest half of the
Liberal Party. Taking the Parliament as a whole 43 members
entered before 1955 and Cl members have entered since then.
Again in terms of years of service but not in terms of 'years of
age I am in the oldest half of the Parliament.
The influx of new members in. the Government Parties
aL.,., shows up in the average age of the Parties. In the Liberal 
  
arty the average. is a fraction over 50, in the Labor Party it
is .a fraction short of	
he average of the Ministry	
2.
57 •	
average	
he îviin_..s pry is 5~ 
There are a number of young Ministers in it. Don Chipp, the  
new Minister for the Navy and Minister in Charge of Tourist  
Activities is 41. Ian Sinclair, who has been Minister for Social  
Services for some time, is 37.Bi_. _l
y Snedden, Minister for
Immigration, is 40; Jim Forbes, Minister for Health and Member
4
for Barker over the border in South. Australia, is 43. The Deputy  
Leader of the Country Party, Doug. Anthony is only 37. Peter  
Howson, Minister for Air is 47.
I don't for one minute suggest that you should have  
all young members in a Government, but it is a good thing to  
have young members such as this who can be trained for greater


G



      ,-3ponsibility in the future.
          Thus, of the Government Ministers in the House of
      ;:epresentptives of 21 seven, including myself, are in this
      ry--„-)uns age group. In the Labor Party front bench there are
      only three in a comparable age group. Lance Barnard, Deputy
      Leader is 47; Noel Beaton from Bendigo is 41 and Rex Patterson
      from Dawson is +O.
          In the last election the Liberal Party attracted one
      or two particularly young members. Andrew Jones, who has won
      the seat of Adelaide, is only 22. I think he was studying for
      his Law degree when he was elected to the Parliament. Don Cameron
      from Queensland is only 27. Phillip Lynch, who now represents
      Flinders, is 33 and there were a number of others in the 30's.
      Andrew Peacock, who replaced Sir Robert Menzies as member for
      Kooyong, earlier in the year, is only 28.
          It augurs well for the Liberal Party and I believe
      and hope for Australia, to be able to attract men such as this,
      some of whom will be in the Parliament for a long while.
          I have worked out this analysis of the membership of
      the House of Representatives in this way because I thought it
      might be interesting to show how the membership has changed and
      to show how the Government Parties have continued to attract new
      people to their ranks. This inevitably brings new ideas to the
      Party, it makes the Party more adaptable to the demands of a 
      changing and growing Australia. That the Opposition has been 
      so rigid in so many of its ideas may in fact be due to the older. 
      membership and the traditional and more conservative Labor outlook. 
      This is one of the problems that Gough Whitlam may have to overcome 
      if he is to succeed inirebuilding the Labor Party.

