<!--start metadata-->
Title: IPEC
Description: press statement
Date: 5/09/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                            /~

 PRESS STATEMENT :
 MALcom FRASER :
                                                      September 5th,1965
                               I P E C
               In the last few days the problem of IPEC has come to national
 notice. IPEC is a company that provides an interstate express parcel 
 service. It began its operations by road transport, but more recently it 
 had chartered old DC.3 aircraft to carry express freight to Tasmania. In 
 about ten years it has built up a business that carries many thousands of 
 tons of freight each year. It provides a good service. The problems 
 that have risen between IPEC and the Government have occurred because 
 IPEC applied for a licence to import additional aircraft so that IPEC
 could expand the air-freight side of its business. If the Government had 
given permission, or if it does give permission in the future, IFEC will 
be entering direct competition with Ansett's and T.A.A. on the major trunk
routes, at least so far as freight is concerned.
              At first sight, most reasonable people would say IPEC should 
be allowed to operate this service but, unfortunately, the problem is much 
more involved than this. If you cast your minds back to about fifteen 
years ago, you will remember that the old A.N.A. was at its last gasp. 
T.A.A. had been established after the war. It had been given a complete - 
monopoly of Government traffic and of mails, and A.N.A.'s financial position
was eroded in the years between 1945 and 1949.  Even though the present 
Government split the mail contracts and allowed Government business to be 
carried on the private enterprise airline, the old A.N.A. was finding it 
impossible to carry on. This would have meant there would be one 
airline in Australia - the Government-controlled T.A.A.
              This was opposed to Government policy. We believe in private 
enterprise and we believe in the best possible service for the public. From 
my own experience, I know that those countries that have given monopolies 
of air routes to one particular airline, whether it be Government or a 
private airline, suffer from air services that are vastly inferior to the 
air services you will find in Australia, especially on the main capital
                                                                    /2

                                    2
city routes. The government then was faced with the dilemma of how to 
maintain competition of some kind on Australia's air routes. Then Ansett's 
came along prepared to buy out the old .a.N.A., and prepared to compete with 
T.A.A. Ansett's had been a third airline which, to this point of time, had 
not been spectacular, but it was, nevertheless, one that had made steady 
progress through offering various specialised services. There were intense 
and difficult ngotiations between the Government and the two airlines; Quite 
obviously the Ansett Company would want some security of tenure if it was going 
to take on the heavy obligation of financing a large interstate fleet, in 
competition with the Government airline. As a result, various agreements 
were worked out, the most important of which was the formalisation of the two-
airline policy.  The agreement to which Ansett-A.N.A. has agreed is attached 
as a schedule to the appropriate Acts of Parliament, and this agreement says 
in fairly plain terms that there shall be two airlines, and not more than two, 
on the main trunk routes in Australia. Passengers and freight are treated 
in the same terms
                This agreement embodied the principal conditions which 
persuaded the company to buy the old A.N.A. and which persuaded it to invest 
heavily in the aircraft industry. The company has, of course, for some time 
borrowed considerable sums of money from the public, and there are 28,165 
Australians who have invested in it on the understanding that the conditions 
now prevailing will endure for the period of the two-airline agreement, which 
will not be due for re-negotiation until 1977.
                The Government is faced with a dilemma. IPEC has done good
business. It is a good company, but there is an agreemant with the present 
airlines and IPEC has known of it. This agreement could not, and should not, 
I believe, be broken, unless the two airlihes concerned agree that its terms
should be varied.  It may be that they will do this. I don't know.  There
are other difficulties in this affair. I am told that, constitutionally, 
once a company has aircraft in Australia, they obtain a licence to operate 
those aircraft and, even-though they might import aircraft for freight purposes, 
you could not legally present them from converting those aircraft to passenger
                                                                    /3

                                — 3 —
use. Thus the two-airline policy would break down. This could lead to a 
disorganization, of air traffic in a manner which, one day, could be exploited 
to enable some future Government to nationalize all air traffic.
                the Government has said that, if IPEG requested a review
of the policy, the Government would conduct such a review. Since this 
statement, however, the Senate has disallowed a regulation which placed 
full responsibility for this matter in the Minister's hands. Responsibility, 
as the law now stands, rests with the Director-General - a civil servant. 
The reasons for this are somewhat complex and I don't want to go into them 
in detail, but it may well be that IPEC will have to go to the courts and 
through lengthy procedures to seek a positive decision to their request to 
import aircraft. The position can hardly be regarded as satisfactory from 
anyone's point of view.


                                  o00

