<!--start metadata-->
Title: Cost of secret ballots
Description: press statement
Date: 31/05/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PR"S STb7'Er..Efi3T       31st, 1959
lALCC LM FRAS ER
            CoS T OF SECRET BALLOTS
          In the last week of the autumn session a small 
but important Bill was passed which should be of great benefit to 
many Unionists. The Government's court controlled secret ballot 
legislation is well known to everyone in Australia. It is well 
known to many Unionists and many different Unions have taken advantage 
of this legislation to get rid of communist control in Uhions.
          There was one defect in the system from the 
point of view of the Union, the cost of the court controlled ballot 
was often substantially more than the cost of a Union control ballot. 
Up to the present time the Unions concerned had to bear this 
increased cost. The Government has recognised that this is not 
reasonable and has, therefore, passed legislation which will make 
it possible for the Government to reimburse Unions for the cost of 
court controlled ballots.
           The attitude of the labour Party over this Bill 
was, to say the least, strange. For some time the Extreme Left Wing 
of the Labour Party has been able to persuade the Party to adopt 
the policy of opposition to all court controlled secret ballots.
          If we could cast our minds back far enough in 
the days of strikes and shortages in the late 1940's I thine most 
Australians would ndt agree that the ab ndonment of this principle 
would be in the best interests of anyone. Even though they opposed 
the principle of secret ballots one might well have thought that the 
A.L.P. would not object to the Government meeting the increased cost 
of these secret ballots, but they opposed this legislation in the 
Parliament last week. Instead, extreme Left winger Eddie Ward 
represents a complete about face because, in the last Parliament 
during 1958, during a debate on secret ballots, he got up and said 
at the very least the Government could meet the cost of these secret 
ballots. It was a terrible thing, Mr. Ward said, that the Unionists 
should have to meet this expense.

                                          2

                          The Government showed in its election policy 
and in the Bill which has just been passed that it agreed with blr. 
Ward, but Jr.a Ward, with his colleagues, opposed the provision when 
it was actually introduced into the House, *hy, I don't think anyone
could say, certainly I can't.The measure was a good one and is of real
benefit to the people it is designed to help.

