<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: Radio talk
Date: 12/09/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                SUNDAY 12TH SEPTEMBER
RADIO TALK      THURSDAY 16TH SEPTEMBER


     I want to talk about the more general aspects of 
the Budget this week.

     In recent times many people have become more than 
usually concerned about inflation. In rural areas there is 
great concern. We have been faced with the prospect of 
rising costs and certainly so far as wool is concerned, with 
falling prices. The rate of inflation in recent times has 
been too great,.and the Government had to act to do something 
about this. The budget is the principal economic weapon 
available to any Government. In times of inflation the 
Government must show restraint in its own spending and it 
must also, at times, take positive steps to reduce the 
inflationary pressures that can come from other areas.

     There is no inflationary pressure being generated 
by the rural industries at the present time. It mostly comes 
from the excess of wage demands, over-award payments and the 
repeated decision of various wage fixing tribunals. It feels 
very nice to have a larger wage, but if the costs of goods 
and the services you want to buy are also going to rise,
nobody really is better off.

    The wage levels which union pressure have been able 
to extract have been one of the principal causes of inflation. 
If these pressures are put too far, you get a situation in 
which business loses confidence, and feels they just can not 
meet the additional wage demands. It should not pass without 
notice that one of the major car firms recently felt that it 
had to dismiss 450 highly skilled tradesmen because it believed 
they were redundant. I am told this has not happened before in 
that industry, and no firm is going to do this lightly, because 
such people have traditionally been hard to attract.

                 2.


        This has been the general scene and against this 
    background the Government felt it essential to restrict its 
    own expenditures and at the same time to raise some additional 
    revenue. The additional revenue had to be raised because of 
    certain unavoidable, but growing demands that were put on the 
    Federal Budget.

        Payments made to the States are much greater now 
    than they have ever been. We have seen the States given
    access to the growth tax, to payroll tax, and a number have 
    already announced their intention to raise additional revenue 
    this way. The Commonwealth's many commitments include payments 
    to the States, which this year will reach nearly $3,000 million. 
    The States will also receive over $250 million from payroll tax 
    and a further $90 million from the same tax if the States 
    increase it by the 1% that they have indicated. These measures 
    are giving the States an increase of nearly $440 million over 
    the figure they got last year. It should not be forgotten that 
    the Commonwealth is also meeting the cost of exempting the 
    non-business activities of local government authorities. The 
    Commonwealth also underwrites the loan programme to the States 
    of over $860 million, and their payments for specific purposes 
    such as roads and education will rise to over $400 million. 
    These are all huge sums. They cannot be reduced - indeed the 
    pressures to increase them each year are very great. They 
    have been increased, and they represent a little better than 
•   one third of the Commonwealth budget.

         The other largest item is the welfare payment - 
    social services, repatriation, health services and other 
    welfare activities which will be very nearly $2,100 million, 
    and that is about $270 million more than last year. $78 
    million of that represents the cost of the new proposals for 
    improvements in social welfare. If there is anyone who wants 
    to know the details of these changes as they affect pensions, 
     endowment and repatriation matters, if they write to me I will 
     let them know.

         The next major item of expenditure by the Commonwealth 
     is of course defence, and this has been increased to over

$1,250 million. A very large part of the increase resulted 
in improved payments and conditions for members of the 
Armed Services as a result of the recommendations of the 
Kerr Committee which I appointed last year. Modern military 
equipment is also enormously expensive, and this expenditure 
should not be begrudged by anyone.
            These three items, payments to the States, welfare  r
and defence together take over two thirds of the Commonwealth 
budget. If you then look at the other important things that 
the Commonwealth has to do - and education is one of them - 
you begin to find that there is not all that much flexibility 
within the Commonwealth finances.

            It was an absolute necessity that additional support 
be provided to the wool industry, and this has been done. I 
have already spoken about the budget impact of these particular 
problems.

            Something which surprises me a little was an attack 
by Dr Gun, Member for Kingston, S.A., on the Australian Wool 
Commission. I would like to quote a paragraph from the speech 
he made in the Parliament on 8th September: He said: "The 
second great error of the Commission is to withhold stocks 
from the auction. This is inviting defeat. The Commission 
is jeopardising its solvency by increasing the stockpile even 
before the auction begins. It is not hard to imagine the 
impact this will have on the ultimate price of the product 
and I am sure this point will not escape the attention of wool 
buyers and manufacturers. Finally the Commission is without 
doubt trying to force the market with a fixed reserve. This is 
completely contrary to the spirit and letter of the Australian 
Wool Commission Act."

            In other words, he is saying that even though demand 
is very low, the Commission should allow all the stocks to go 
on to the market whatever the price, and that the Commission is 
trying to maintain the price at too high a level.

        He might just as well say that there should be no 
    Australian Wool Commission. This kind of comment is typical 
    of the attitudes that are held in city areas by people who 
    have no experience of the problems of the rural industries.








•

