<!--start metadata-->
Title: Middle East
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 17/08/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       MID LB %A fi
               By: Malcolm k°raser,ber for r`+ canoa.
            Last week Parliament interrupted the debate on the Budget
to disousa the dangerous and difficult position in the dd1u asst.
I think every !ember benefited from the able and comprehensive ocoount
of the situation by the Minister for .e=ternal :,1r. Casey.
             There are probably four main causes of unrest in the Middle 
Best but they are so intermingled it is very difficult if not impossible
to isolato them.
             Firstly, there the presence of Israel originally
Busra:nteed by :"erica end the nitoà :ing. om. Israel was carved out of 
country that formerly belonged to +rabe and its very presence tends to turn 
the P1.rab people against the weeL. râ3 countries and inspires the Arabs to 
assert their on nationalism. This feeling is strengthened by the presence 
of roughly a million rub refugees who vices a displaced in the 194Cs. as a
result of the creation of Israel and for whoa little or nothing has been 
done.
             tiecondly, there ix the. general feeling of .-rab nntionelism
 and the wish of many of the Arab countries to assert their awn voice aid 
 own authority more vigorously than they have done in the past.
            Lven. though these countrioc are all salt'-gove -ning., some of 
 the rulers have become unpopular simply because they hale had associations 
 and agreui tints with the West. which has mistaking,ly bean interpreted by the 
 revolutionaries of the Arab world as being dominated by the Weet.
              Thirdly, then io also the controversial and contradictory 
 Col. Nasser. This man has quite plainly taken upon himself the role of_ 
 4 Godlike hero. his own writings oonfir: this. Be wishes to unite the 
 whole Arab and Muslim world to give him a great foxce in world affairs. 
 On a lower level I believe he wishes to unite the Arab world because ïgypt 
 has no revenue frown oil and because many othercouutries are doing very 
 nicely out of their oil, as leafier of an "Arab Federation, Nassar and .:gypt
 would probably oilers in this.
               He says he wants to be friends with the West yet at the
  seas- time his radio station blares out antiestern propaganda. He does 
  not always Keep his agree -ents. Be goes not always any the serie thing. 
  There was a time when the West sucoe sod in working. with him fairly well 
  but Britain. and the United states became tired of being. played af f against

                 WM


the IlViet Union. This led to tbe t.Sjì. ane the U.1. refusiug to finance 

his Aswan dam. This also led to the nationalisntion of the Suez Canal. 

Nevertheless, before the present crisis Lasser had been tryine to restore

trading relations with the Westera countries.

       The fourth element in the Middle i;ase is Russia whose agents

stir the pot and do everything they possibly can to see that unrest remains 
in the Middle ;east.

       The present crisis over libanon and Jordan began because 

agents fmm outside these two countries had been supplying rebel with arms

aid had fairly openly been planning to overthrow the govennments of these 
two cointries.

       Cairo radio has been shouting encouragement to the

revolutionaries who thus gain unofficial support from Egypt.

       The Governments of the two countries appealed first to the

United Nations and then to the U.K. and the U.eid. for help so that they 
could make some atteipt to curb these disruptive elements from outside.

       The U.K. and the U.$.;, actions were legally and morally 
right e thee were honourable. They acted in accordance with t1 United
Nations, informing the United Nations of their actions at the request of 
the respective Government and at the saue tiv, hoping that the United Natia
would take over from them. Reeolutione which would have replaced IJ.K, and 
U.5. forces with the United Notions iolice Force were vetoed by eueela.

        If the Western countries had taken no action the smaller 
countries of the world would have had no protection aeainst disruptive 
elements from outside their borders. The word of Britain and of America 
would have been worth nothing. The tragedy is that these two countries had 
to take upon themselves the task which belongs to the United Nations. 
They had to eat to save Lebanon and Zoltan from insurrection because the 
United Nations has not the power. Its legal machinery is too slow to use 
and by the time it is geared for action it would be too late.

        The future so far es the 1.ddle Sast is concerned does 
not look particularly bright. Thor is no clear solution of the con- 
Meting and antagouistic laments in the Middle Lest butthe Beet must, 
I believe, try once again to work with Nasser. The elternutivu is to 
send him tumbling into the era of Russia. ievidenc from the past supports 
this. We refused to supply him with arms because we were suspicious of 
the circumstances for which he wanted them. He gotrvis arms from Russia 
and Russia got a leg-in on the Middle Bast. If we refuse to trade with 
him in the future his trade will become, more and more orienteted with 
Russia increasing Nasser's dependence ou Russia. If we must, work with 
him Nasser must learn that his agreeeenes have to be kept and he must 
also learn that he must mow interfering in affairs of other Arab Nations 
and in this regard the United Nations must play its part. So far as the 
United Nations is concerned =acme 14 becomes armed with ti permanent. police 
force and unless it has the power, to use this force swiftly when it is 
needed, crises of the kind we heve recently witnessed will recur.

        We must hope the General Assembly of the United Nations
will realise its responsibilities and create a permanent police force. 
If it can impose political peace in the Middle Last, the United NatLons 
should then work to aid economic development XI a of backward Arab countrie





14/8/1958.

