<!--start metadata-->
Title: Terms of trade and rural credit - 3rd and concluding article
Description: press statement
Date: 16/04/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  •

PRESS STATEMENT      WEEK ENDING 16TH APRIL, 1961,



            TERMS OF TRADE AND RURAL CREDIT.

            THIRD AND CONCLUDING ARTICLE.

    In the last two weeks I have reported in general terms on 
Australia's economic position and of the Government's measures to 
combat it, Today I will deal with two Particular aspects of this 
situation. The first of these concerns rural credit,

    In the past, whenever there has been a credit squeeze
necessary in the national interest, primary producers have complained 
that this hampers their normal day to day operations. Because of this, 
on this occasion, the Government, and in particular, the Treasurer, 
Mr. Holt, went to very great lengths to see that the amount of credit 
available to primary producers for carrying on their operations would 
not be reduced. The Directive that the Reserve Bank sent to all the 
Trading Banks made it quite clear that the interests of exporting 
industries, which includes the primary industries, were to be fully 
maintained, This Directive made it quite clear also that those sect ions 
of the economy to be hardest hit were to be those involved in adding 
to the inflationary pressures or in speculation of one kind or another, 
Operations in land trusts and some of the excess activities of hire 
purchase companies have been very greatly curbed, The fact that the 
existing level of credit was to remain available to farmers does not 
mean that if a farmer wanted to get an increased overdraft he would 
get it unless the circumstances were truly exceptional. However, it 
certainly does mean that any primary producer who has had an overdraft 
limit of, say, £Lç,000 or £5,000 for the last 3 or L. years should be 
able to draw up to this limit,

    I want to emphasise that there is nothing in Government credit 
policy or in the actions of the Reserve Bank which would give anyone 
the excuse to reduce a long outstanding overdraft limit belonging to any 
particular farmer. This, of course, does not cover the situation in 
which a person who already has borrowed a certain amount of money and 
has contracted to pay it back by a certain period, The normal 
relationship between a bank and the customer must be preserved.

    It is my belief that most banks have carried out the government's 
intentions and the instructions of the Reserve Bank religiously and 
most conscientiously, but there was a case in New South Yales in which 
one bank did not even send copies of its instructions to the Branch 
Managers but just said: "Reduce advances". In this kind of circum- 
stance, all sorts of mistakes were made.

    It is worth noting that a short while ago the Head Offices 
of all banks undertook to examine any particular instance where a 
primary producer felt that he had been unjustly treated by a Branch 
Manager. Previously I have said that I would have any case examined 
if a farmer felt that his overdraft limit had been wrongly reduced. 
Although I have tried to give fairly pride publicity to this sort of 
circumstance, only one person has approached me and his case is currently 
under examination. I will certainly have any other cases examined 
that are brought to my notice but it appears that, in this matter, 
banks in this area are carrying out the Government's requests con- 
scientiously and accurately,

    The other matter I wanted to deal with concerns the change 
in Australia's terms of trade. It is the change in the terms of trade 
which have really been the cause of our present difficulties.
Inflation caused by the pressures of development and by the modern 
social conscience that demands full employment have certainly been 
contributing factors, but inflation in this country has not been much 
in excess of inflation in other countries and has been less than in 
some, If our terms of trade had remained the same, the inflation

              -2-


 we have experienced would not have harmed us.

     The definition of the terms of trade can roughly be called 
 the price we have to pay for our imports as compared with the price 
 we get for our exports. Since 1953, a year international organisations 
have taken as a base, Australia's terms of trade have fallen by about 
 35%. The terms of trade of industrial countries like the United 
Kingdom, the United States and Japan have increased by 12% to 15%. 
The terms of trade have moved against Australia much more so than 
 in other countries.

     In Canada, a country that is not dissimilar to our own, and 
 also in New Zealand, the terms of trade have only fallen by 3% and 
6% respectively.

     Broadly speaking, the terms of trade have moved heavily 
against raw material and food exporting countries and in favour of 
industrial ones. After I had spoken in Parliament on this subject 
my father asked what I meant by terms of trade. In plain terms, it 
can be described as the volume of goods we have to export to get the 
volume of imports we need. Today we have to export nearly two bales 
of wool to do the job of one in 1953.

     All this can be put in plainer terms. It is estimated 
Australia will get £880M. in overseas funds this year. If we got 
1953 prices for the produce we are exporting this year, we would be 
getting £l,350M, about 60% more than we are getting today.

     For some time the Government has recognised that world 
trading conditions have been becoming more difficult for Australia. 
As a first obvious means of combatting these conditions, the
Government has tried to create conditions in which the rural
industries would be able to export more. In the last 7-8 years, the 
volume ofrural production has increased 20% while over the last 
decade wool production has increased 50%. Exports of rural products 
have increased 25% in 7-8 years. Despite this greatly increased 
volume, the fall in price we get for these goods has been so large 
that we are still in difficulty and this has made it necessary for 
some re-organisation in our thinking inside Australia. It is these 
changes that have made the Government's recent actions necessary,

