<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rule of law, conscription, television reception
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 12/03/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          TEXT OF                          3HA Sunday 12 March,1972
          BROADCAST:                       3YB Thurs. 16 March,1972
          BY TFHE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.3LK Tues.  14 March,1972



          On this occasion, I want to talk to you about the importance 
          of the rule of law. To us in country areas, this may seem an 
          odd subject for a topical weekly radio talk.


          After all, ours is, on the whole, a law abiding community. 
          The plain fact is that neither you nor I normally query the 
          proposition that laws are laws and must be obeyed, even though 

          we may not particularly like them.
i

          We have elected Members of Parliament whose main function is 
          to make laws, and we accept the democratic obligation upon us 

          to obey those laws.


          While it may be self-evident to you that laws are made to be 
          obeyed or changed, I raise the issue because in the last two 
          weeks, the Australian Labor Party has opposed this fundamental 
          principle of our society.

•
          The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Whitlam, stated in Brisbane 

          that draft dodging was not a crime. Once more, Mr. Whitlam, 
          an experienced lawyer, has encouraged Australians to break a 
          law made by the very legislature of which he is a member.


          He did a similar thing eighteen months ago when he issued his 
          infamous "mutiny" advice to young national servicemen. On 
          that occasion, he said he would advise national servicemen who 

          objected to the Vietnam war to declare that they would not obey 

          an order to go to Vietnam.



                                                       .../2

                                                                                                                                                                               2.

                               The background to Mr. Whitlam's most recent outburst is
                               this. The Australian Labor Party has endorsed Mr. Barry Johnston
                               to contest the seat of Hotham in Victoria in the next Federal
                               election. Commonwealth police are seeking Mr. Johnston who
                               is wanted for failing to obey a call-up notice. A few days
                               ago, Mr. Johnston spoke to an A.L.P. meeting behind locked
                               doors at the Victorian Trades Hall. A little later, Mr. Whitlam
                               said in a radio interview that draft dodging was not a crime.
                               He then added, "After this next election there'll be no draft".
•                              I believe that Mr. Whitlam's remarks amount to advocacy to break 
                               the law. That a Labor Government would change that law is no 
                               justification at all. Coming from a person in a position of 
                               prominence and authority, such an argument is thoroughly 
                               irresponsible. It amounts to an undermining of the rule of law 
                               which the vast majority of citizens in the Australian community 
                               accept without question.
                               I sympathise with Mr. Whitlam's deputy, Mr. Barnard, in his
•                              efforts to retrieve the situation. He told the House of 
                               Representatives on 2 March that there was a duty to obey the 
                               National Service Act until it was repealed. But it was too late. 
                             Mr. Whitlam had made the Labor Party's position quite plain.
                               I ask you to consider the repercussions of applying Labor's 
                             principle to the general area of law and order. Imagine the 
                             chaos that would result if people refused to obey laws on the 
                             grounds that the Opposition was committed to change those laws 
                               if it became th Government. Are people to be permitted to refuse~ 
                             to pay taxes orA ommit criminal offences because they anticipate 
                             a change of Government and therefore a change in those laws?

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -../3

                 3.

   In taking this public position, Mr. Whitlam has sacrificed 
   the basic principle of the rule of law purely in an attempt 
   to satisfy the Labor Party's dominant left-wing which has 
   consistently sought to weaken Australia's defence and security 
   position.

   I now turn briefly to an important local matter with which I 
   have been involved in the last few weeks. On 25 February, I 
   made an inspection of the television receiption in schools in the 
   Casterton area. Accompanying me was Mr. S. Brownless, a planning 
   engineer at the Australian Broadcasting Control Board. The 
   inspection was arranged with the Shire of Glenelg and it 
   allowed me to see the poor quality of the area's reception, 
   particularly as it deprives the schools of viewing educational 
   programmes designed especially to complement the Victorian 
   Education Department courses.

   Several possible solutions were thrown up during the inspection. 
   It was suggested that the A.B.C. could hire time on the
•  Mt. Gambier commercial channel, SES8 for school programmes. 
   Channel 8 is received adequately throughout the Casterton district.

   Another suggestion was that since the A.B.C. Channel at
   Mt. Gambier is widely watched in the Casterton area, there could
   be coordination between Victoria and South Australia and with
   the A.B.C. on the screening of school programmes. I have had some
   discussion with the South Australian Minister for Education and
   he told me that his department would be prepared to cooperate
   to see if it would be possible to devise television programmes
   that would suit the curriculum of both States. I believe this
   could develop into wider objectives in having programmes that
   were suitable for all States, and I have asked my department to pursue
                          the matter.

                 4.
   This sort of coordination could be extended to current affairs 
   programmes. Some people in the area said they had no interest 
   in S.A. State affairs, and would prefer to watch the corresponding 
   Victorian programmes.
   Among other suggestions was one to establish a community
   aerial to pick up the Victorian A.B.C. signal, presumably from 
   Ballarat, for the schools and from there to households. But 
   this could_ be expensive for local people. As another alternative, 
   special tapes and video equipment enabling television programmes
•  to be taped and played back through television receivers could 
   be provided.
   I have put all these matters before the Postmaster—General, 
   and hope to have more information for you when my representations 
   and the report of the engineer have been considered fully.

   Goodbye for now.

•

