<!--start metadata-->
Title: European common market
Description: press statement
Date: 30/07/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  PRESS STATEMENT

                                                          July 30th,1961

                          Last Tuesday we saw in our national press that the 
                  United Kingdom has made the decision to ask for negotiations
                  regarding her own entry to the Common Market. I think this 
                  decision was probably inevitable, but because of its grave 
                  consequences for Australia, I am going to devote two articles 
                  to the Common Market so that we may have an understanding not 
                  only of our own position, but also of the United Kingdom motives.
                           Discussion in England has been going on about the
                  Common Market, not just for weeks but for years. The first 
                  discussion of these matters took place a very long time ago 
                  in Canberra. However, it is only the imminent possibility of 
                  England joining the market that has aroused deep concern in 
                  Australia and which has brought the matter to public notice.
                          It is not always realised that there are two trade
                  blocks in Europe, with different objectives. There are first 
                  of all the Common Market countries - or the "Six" as they are 
                  called - France, Italy, Germany, Belgium, Luxemburg, the
•                 Netherlands.  These six countries have several objectives. 
                  Secondly, it is their aim to adopt a common agricultural
                  policy to encourage self-sufficiency.  These are important 
                  economic aims, but it should be borne in mind throughout the 
                  discussions that the Common Market countries are also aiming 
                  towards some degree of political integration as a means of 
                  achieving greater stability in Europe, and as a means of
                  strengthening Western democracies.  This, I believe, is a 
                  most important objective, but it is an intangible one and one 
                  that cannot be measured in terms of hard cash.
                          When negotiations for the Common Market began the 
                  -United Kingdom was uneasy about the market because she felt it 
                  might put up the price of food to the British consumer, and 
•                 because she felt it might fall hard upon other members of the 
                  Commonwealth who would not gain access to the Common Market 
                  countries for their agricultural products - that is access on 
                  terms comparable to those in which these products now get into
                  the United Kingdom market.  It might be added that England, 
                  I think, was also fearful of losing the preferences that
                  countries such as ourselves give her for her manufactured goods.
                          Because of these initial fears regarding the Common 
                  Market the United Kingdom sponsored the European Free Trade 
                  Association which involved six other European countries.
                          The purpose of this Organization, or of the "Seven" 
                  as they are called, is much more limited than the Common Market. 
                  These countries will all retain their own individual tariffs 
                  against external countries, but would move slowly towards 
                  free trade amongst themselves, but only so far as manufactured 
                  goods were concerned. This is a significant difference because 
                  agricultural products were excluded from the arrangements, and 
                  thus there would have been no danger that Australia's exports 
                 to the United Kingdom would be jeopardized.

                                             2
                           The United Kingdom hoped the European free Trade 
                  Association would be an effective counter to the Common Market 
                  and thus avoid the necessity of the United Kingdom having to 
                  make the decision to go in or to stay out of the Common Market. 
                  It has not worked out like this. The Common Market countries 
                  contain the most important political and economic units in 
                  Mainland Europe, and England standing alone would necessarily
                  fall behind in power, influence and authority.  This is now 
                  recognised in the United Kingdom and thus the present heart
                  searching about joining or not.  It is quite clear that the 
                  Free Trade Association has not offered the attractions of the 
                  Common Market which appears as if it will be a great success.
                           Because of the political importance of the Common 
                  Market agreement known as the Treaty of Rome, I believe if it 
                  is humanly possible that the United Kingdom should, indeed 
                  must, join if reasonable conditions of entry can be gained for 
                  Commonwealth agricultural products. The Western European 
                  democracies and the cause of freedom would be best served by
•                 this move.   United Kingdom entry would create a compact group 
                  of nations having over 200 million people who should be well
                  able to defend themselves against any threat.  The Free 
                  World would be strengthened by this unity of the democracies 
                  of Europe.
                             Of course, depending on the terms of entry, the 
                  incorporation of the United Kingdom in the Common Market could 
                  have severe implications for Australia and other Commonwealth 
                  countries.
                             What the United Kingdom will try and do, and what 
                  we are impressing on her that she must do, is to have the 
                  six Common Market countries agree that our product should still 
•                 get good access at least to our traditional market in the 
                  United Kingdom. Failing that, it may be possible to work out 
                  some other reasonable agreement that would cover the whole 
                  Common Market.
                              Australia's main export - wool - would not be 
                  affected by the Common Market because these countries do not 
                  compete with us and, in any case, wool now enters all those
                  countries as a duty free item.   This would be continued.
                              However, when we come to dairy products - meat, 
                  wheat, dried fruits and wines, the story could be a very 
                  different one.   We might find quite heavy duties raised against 
                  exports of these products to Europe unless United Kingdom 
                  negotiators with the Common Market can be skilful and tough.
                              On estimates I have seen, about 170 million worth 
                  of Australia's exports to Europe could be affected by Common 
                  Market agreements, and this is a pretty fair chunk of Australia's
                  total trade.   It is quite clear that if England entered the 
                  Common Market as a full member, without getting special

                                        3 -
                concessions, for countries like Australia, it would mean very 
                real hardship to Australia and this must be resisted. However, 
                I believe the political implications of the United Kingdom 
                joining the Common Market are so very great and so important 
                to the strength and permanence of free institutions within 
                Western Europe and through Western Europe in the world that 
                England's participation in the Market is probably inevitable. 
                I am glad, therefore, that the United Kingdom has started 
                negotiations now to obtain the most favourable terms for our
                exports that can be achieved. The longer she delays the more 
                difficult it may be to get reasonable terms of entry. 
                Negotiations had to start before the Common Market countries 
                work out their common agricultural policies because this is the 
                field that is most likely to affect Australia and other 
                Commonwealth countries.
                         some encouragement can be taken from the fact that 
                some Common Market countries have overseas territories and there 
                will be special arrangements for these territories so that their
•               exports will not be unduly affected. However, this is not a 
                true comparison with Australia because these are largely 
                dependent territories governed partly by various members of 
                the "Six".
                         Next week I'll have some more to say about the Common 
                Market and its possible repercussions on the Commonwealth as a 
                whole.

