<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australia Party, censorship protests, abortion, Little Red Schoolbook, the family
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 9/07/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    BROADCAST:      3HA Sunday, 9 July, 1972 
                    3YB Thursday, 13 July, 1972 
                    3LK Tuesday, 11 July 1972


       Recently, the Australia Party released a booklet setting
    out its policy in several areas. Among the party's proposals as
    reported in the national press were the abolition of all forms of
    censorship, legalisation of abortion, repeal of legislation
    prohibiting the advertising of contraceptives, repeal of laws
    relating to sexual acts, legalisation of prostitution and
    relaxation of our attitudes towards drugs.
•      It is the release of these policy proposals which has
    prompted me to discuss community attitudes to these matters.
       Young people today are perhaps more idealistic than ever
    before, showing an immense concern for world problems. This is
    one stream of development — the attitudes ofour young — of which
    Australia can be proud.
       However, there is another stream in the community which
    runs concurrently with it, but is very different and which gives
    us no cause for pride — an unwillingness to accept the minimum
•   discipline that is necessary for an ordered society, an unwillingness
    to work within the framework of the law in our efforts to change
    that law.
       We see riots at universities as a means of seeking to change
    the law rather than working through the normal processes. The
    deplorable fact is that these things can only be encouraged by
    statements from leading public figures advocating a course that
    could lead to mutiny in the armed forces or declaring that
    defiance of the law is no crime. These things are all part of
    a discernable trend which can only lead to the breakdown of the
    law and all respect for the society in which we live.

                           .../2

                              2.

              In Australia there is a very great change in social
        attitudes — a permissiveness, if you like — a change in the
        material newspapers publish, a change in the films that are
        seen on the nation's cinema screens. Those who support these
        changes would do so on the grounds of freedom, of sophistication,
        of allowing individuals to choose and set their own standards.
        But this is not the end of the matter, because there are certain
        standards and disciplines within a community which must be
        maintained if the strength, vigour and ethic of that society
•       are to be protected.
              I believe the Government and other leaders of the
        community should, by their attitudes and public statements, work
        towards the preservation of these standards.
              I know that this whole issue presents enormously difficult
        problems. But should we really be proud of changes in attitudes
        and in the law which have led to a doubling of the legal abortion
        rate in twelve months in South Australia — from 1330 in 1970 to
        2519 in 1971, so that last year there were 105 abortions for
        every 1000 live births? Other State Governments have not found
~       it necessary to change their laws on the matter. It ought to be
        understood that abortion is possible if a mother's health is
        significantly threatened. The reformists, however, want abortion
        on request, an entirely different matter.
              Should we be proud of attitudes that mean there is barely
        a theatre within our capital cities providing general exhibition
        films, where R films dominate our cinemas?
              Should we be proud of attitudes which result in people hawking
        things like the Little Red School Book, that untidy, insidious
        and dirty little publication? It was not only the contents of that


                                                   ...3/

                3.
    particular book that were so important, but also the fact that 
    its publication was deliberately aimed at young school children. 
       Nor can we be proud of the circumstances in which school 
    teachers, who are most involved in the education and upbringing
    of our children and to whom students ought to look for an 
    example, are called out on strike by their association leaders, 
    perhaps the first of the professions to use strike action as a 
    matter of course. What kind of example is this for the students
•   they teach?
       I don't want my remarks to be misinterpreted, as can so
    easily happen when one discusses issues such as this. Nobody 
    would want a return to the attitudes of the Victorian era and 
    the hypocrisies that accompanied it. But there must be 
    maintained a minimum of discipline without which schools, and 
    society generally, will not function properly. I believe 
    that in some areas, there is less discipline than the required 
    minimum. While I am greatly encouraged by the intensely 
    idealistic strand of thought and action in our young people 
    pressing their elders to achieve a better standard, I voice 
    my concern at the other strand running contrary to these 
    traditional values which are essential to the strength, vitality 
    and determination of any community and to the family unit.
       Attitudes and practices which tend to damage or weaken the
    strength of the family within our society are attitudes and 
    practices that should not be condoned. Mr. Whitlam said on 
    24 June last year: "I believe in abortion on request". That 
    attitude is not good enough.

               4.

       The family remains central to the Australian community 
    and policies and actions of governments should be directed 
    towards maintaining the strength of the family unit.
       The attitudes to which I have referred would weaken 
    that strength.
       A society cannot survive without some minimum of 
    discipline, without an element of self restraint, without a 
    high regard of one person for another. Unlicensed sexual 
    behaviour, abortion on request, a less rigorous attitude 
•   in relation to drugs, legalisation of prostitution, the 
    pandering to the lowest community tastes in literature, all 
    these strike at the heart of values which are important to 
    Australia and which every decent Australian and every family 
    will want to protect.
       There are greater freedoms in our community. Young people 
    have more opportunity to express their views, to argue for them. 
    There is greater opportunity to work to change and improve the 
    basis of our society. There is a greater desire for more 
    equality, to achieve for all Australians an equal and proper 
    place.
       However, while change and evolution of our society is 
    necessary and inevitable, there are traditional values which 
    we must fight to protect.
                000000000


    For further information: Collin Myers
               Telephone Canberra 73 3261

