<!--start metadata-->
Title: Mail services to and from Vietnam
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: c1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    MAIL SERVICES TO AND FROM VIETNAM


Statement by the Minister for the Army, the Hon.
Malcolm Fraser, M.P.




     The importance of mail to the maintenance of high 

morale is fully appreciated by the Army and every effort is 

made to produce the most efficient mail service between our 

soldiers in overseas theatres and their families, friends and 

relations back in Australia.



     The Minister for the Army, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, said 

today that the mail system now in operation was the result of 

experience gained during the past 12 months in an operational 

theatre of war.



     Every effort w;s being made by our own and US military 

authorities to keep any delays in mail to an absolute minimum and 

continual reviews would be directed at improving, where possible, 

the mail service.



     Basically the system provided two major facilities - 

all classes of mail, and for a telegraphic service.

     MAIL Mail was divided into two main priorities. 

     Priority-one included letters, postcards and the 

     like. Priority-two included parcels, newspapers 

     and similar articles.


PRIORITY-ONE

     All priority-one mail was treated as airmail.

     From Australia, mail was despatched daily to Vietnam 

via Honolulu.

     Between Australia and Honolulu, the mail was carried 

by Qantas and Pan American Airways.


                         /2

                     -2-

         At Honolulu, it was transferred to either military 
aircraft or civilian aircraft under charter to the American 
Armed Services.
         From Honolulu it was flown direct to Saigon.
         At Saigon, mail for Australian troops was passed 
directly to one of the two Australian Field Post Offices. One 
post office was located in Saigon, and the other at Vung Tau.
         From the military post offices mail was delivered 
by the most expeditious means to Australian units.
         From records, kept by both the Postmaster General's 
Department and the military post offices in Vietnam, the average 
transit time for mail between Australia and Vietnam was 3-4 days.
         Allowing for distribution within the theatre and 
transit time within Australia, delivery from date of posting 
to date of receipt by the soldier should not exceed 5-6 days.
         From Vietnam, priority-one mail was handled in just 
the reverse system.
         It was passed by units to the military post offices. 
From there it was carried by military or charter aircraft to 
Honolulu and then by Qantas or Pan American Airways to Australia. 
Records show that the same transit timings apply.

PRIORITY-TWO
         Priority-two mail is handled in a different manner. 
Although treated as surface mail it was carried to Vietnam 
as air cargo.
         To give the best service this mail was segregated 
into two groups.
         Newspapers and other articles which can be recognised 
by the P.M.G. Sorting Department as periodicals of dated interest 
were segregated from the remainder and were despatched once a 
week as priority cargo on Australian courier aircraft which 
operated between Sydney and Saigon.
         The remainder of priority-two mail was carried under/3

                      -3—
arrangements made with the American Air Force between 
Richmond, N.S.W., and Saigon via Honolulu. This mail was 
despatched weekly from Richmond but could experience some 
delay in transfer at Honolulu. This was due to the fact 
that the aircraft used between Honolulu and Saigon were 
reserved primarily for operationally urgent stores and also 
priority—one mail.

       Despite this, our records indicated that the delay 
between despatch Australian and receipt Saigon rarely exceeded 
3-4 weeks. Allowing for transit time both within Australia 
and within the theatre of operations, delivery should be made 
within five weeks of posting in Australia.

       From Vietnam, priority—two mail was carried aboard 
Australian courier aircraft as back loading cargo. Delivery 
time in this case should not exceed two weeks.

MAIL CHARGES
       The charges raised for mail services between soldiers 
overseas and their families and friends in Australia were:— 
     Concession Rate   compared with Normal Rate 
Air Mail (Priority—One)
Letters — five cents each half ounce 15 cents each half ounce
Postcards and greeting cards 3c each 8c each half ounce
half ounce
Parcels 35c each 8 oz.               $1.10 each 8 oz./4

                        —4—



MAIL CHARGES (Cont...)


      Concession Rate    compared with    Normal Rate
Surface Mail (Priority—two)
Letters, lettercards and               Not over one ounce 7c.

postcards — 2c each ounce              each additional ounce 4c.


Other articles, including newspapers   Not over 2 oz. 4c. each

2c each 4 oz.                          additional 2 oz. 3c.


Parcels Up to 21b — 20c                Parcels not exceeding —
       Up to 31b — 25c                 alb. — 90e.
       Up to 71b — 40c
       Up to 11 lb — 50c.              71b. — $1,40
       Up to 16 lb — 65c              lllb. — $1.80

       Up to 22 lb — 80c              221b. — $2.50
Books and similar articles registered  No normal rate applicable

at G.P.O. — 2c each eight ounce weight to the postage of this

                                       material.



       It was important, of course, to ensure speedy delivery, 

that letters and parcels should be correctly addressed and that 

the correct amount of postage was used.



       The addresses for troops in Vietnam should be — 

SAIGON — Number Rank Name

           Unit

           Armed Forces Post Office (AFPO) No. 1

           c/— G.P.O.  SYDNEY N.S.W. 

VUNG TAU or TASK FORCE

          Number Rank Name 

          Unit

          AFPO No. 3

          c/— G.P.O.  SYDNEY N.S.W.

                                                 ..... ..5

          -5—

   While the delivery times to Vietnam for parcels 
might appear excessive, our experience had shown that 
if it were sent by sea in the normal way, delivery would 
be longer and less certain.

   In general terms, the units which were located in 
Saigon should bear the AFPO 1 address and those units located 
in Vung Tau, or with the Task Force at Baria, should carry the 
AFPO 3 postal address.

   If in any doubt, families and friends should have their 
correspondents in Vietnam indicate precisely which address should 
be used.
   A word of warning for those people in Australia who were 
writing to advisers of the Australian Army Training Team, Vietnam. 
They should continue to use the postal address as advised by 
their husbands, sons and friends with the team.

   The 100 strong team of advisers was scattered throughout 
the northern areas of South Vietnam, attached to Vietnamese Army 
units and training centres.

TELEGRAPHIC SERVICE
   Apart from the letter and parcel service, a concession 
telegram service known as Expeditionary Forces Messages (EFM) 
was also available to troops and families, friends.

   This service permitted Australian servicemen based 
in Vietnam and their families and friends in Australia to send 
telegrams to each other at the ordinary inland Australian 
rate of 30 cents for the first 12 words.
                         /6

•                                   —6—

                 The text of these messages was limited to a maximum 
         of three phrases selected by the sender from a list of EFM 
         standard texts which were available at post offices throughout 
         Australia and at the Australian field post offices in Vietnam.

                 An example of the messages that could be sent —
                 138957 Sgt. J. Brown
                 5 RAR
                 Aust FPO No. 3
                 VIET NAM
                 Message — 303, 60, 38
                                Joan.

                 Which translated means — "Parcel was just what I 
         wanted (.) Happy anniversary (.) Loving greetings from
         all of us (,)    Joan.

