<!--start metadata-->
Title: Army discusses Vietnam tour
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 3/08/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FOR PRESS                      No. 4967

         ARMY MINISTER DISCUSSES VIETNAM TOUR
         Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
           the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, T.P.

     The main purpose of my visit was to gain first hand knowledge of 
the current conditions under which our troops are operating in Vietnam. 
Thus, in Vietnam most of my time was spent in the Task Force area at Nui Dat, 
with the Logistic Support Force at Da Nang and with members of the Australian 
Army Training Team in the area south of the demilitarised zone.
     I found all Australian troops in Vietnam to be in very good heart. 
Morale is high and they are continuing to perform, as one would expect, a 
most useful role. In Vung Tau province reasonable security has been 
established for 80 to 90% of the population.
     In the last 12 months roads have been opened to traffic and 
commerce. Thus, it is now possible to do much more for the welfare of the 
people in the province.
     Our own Civil Affairs Unit has been expanded as you know and is 
settling in well. It will continue with the same kinds of tasks that have 
been undertaken over the last 12 months but on a larger scale. At this 
stage it is too early to make a final judgement but I am hopeful that the 
work of this Unit can be expanded by finding room for one or two specialists 
not presently included in the team.
     There are five Revolutionary Development Teams working in our 
province area. These teams consist of about 59 people who are trained for 
their tasks by the South Vietnamese at a special school in Vung Tau. So far 
about 30,000 members of Revolutionary Development Teams have been trained in 
this way and these members have been recruited largely from the villages to 
which they will be allocated. Their purpose is to assess the needs of the 
people in their areas and then to help them improve their own standard of 
life. They are not designed to step in and do all the work for the villagers. 
Rather, they work in co—operation with them and encourage them to do things 
for themselves. I saw several villages where these teams were operating and 
visited one in particular, north of Hue. I met the elected village leaders and 
there seemed to be a general enthusiasm for the work that the Teams are
accomplishing. At this particular village I also met General Thang who paid one of
his ,unannounced calls to the area. He is the Minister responsible for the
Revolutionary Development Programme and he is a most impressive person. He
told me that he was not only concerned that these Teams should assist in
raising standards in the villages, but also that they should maintain the spirit
of the people. This was emphasised in their training, for General Thang said
that after 20 years of fighting he was concerned that the people might become
tired and cease to have the will to do things for themselves.
     Our Civil Affairs Unit will be actively co—operating with these 
Revolutionary Development Teams.

                 — 2 —
     While reasonable security has been established over a wide area 
 there can be no guarantee that incidents will not occur. If our forces were 
 to be moved from the Province without being replaced by other substantial 
 forces, the enemy — the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese units that have been 
 pushed away from the centres of population — would return. The task is 
 unfinished and much remains to be done. There can be no guarantee that the 
 Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese will not reinforce the units in the area 
 and again challenge the Task Force.
     When I visited the forces last year the camp area was not fully
 established and conditions were very difficult. Now good facilities have 
 been installed at Vung Tau for the Logistic Support Force and the Task Force 
 camp at Nui Dat is well developed. I was particularly pleased to see that 
 the rest facilities at Vung Tau have been vastly improved. Modern hotel—type 
 accommodation is to be opened in a week or two and the Armed Forces Club 
 close to the beach is very near completion.
     I spent two days around Da Nang and in the Quang Tri province
 north of Hue. Here I visited several members of the Australian Army Training 
 Team in the areas in which they are operating with Vietnamese units. Every 
 Vietnamese or United States officer that I met spoke in the highest possible 
 terms of the work of these members. They are operating in difficult circum- 
 stances in isolated and extremely dangerous areas. The members were optimistic 
 about the future and said that considerable progress had been made recently 
 by the Revolutionary Development Teams in villages that were quite insecure 
 three months ago.
     I was briefed on the current situation in the demilitarised zone
 in the areas to the south of the Zone. The fighting record of a Division of 
 the Army of the Republic of Vietnam which I visited was quite remarkable. 
 Under skillful and aggressive leadership the Division has averaged 28 days 
 out of each month on operations over this year. In the same period it has 
 conducted more than 90 operations of battalion size or larger. Their record 
 of victories over the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese is worthy of the 
 highest praise.
     In the north I was also given some figures which quite dramatically
 showed the effect of bombing pauses over North Vietnam. Throughout the last 
half of last year up to January 1967, Marine units in the north had been 
 subject to an average of about 800 rounds of mortar fire a month. They were 
not subject to any artillery or rocket fire. Since February and after the 
Tet truce of the 8th to 12th of that month, allied units in the North have been 
 subject to an average of nearer 4,300 rounds of mortar fire, over 1000 rounds 
of artillery fire, in addition. to heavy rocket attacks such as that which was 
directed at Da Nang air base. While the evidence is not conclusive, it would 
seem a reasonable inference that the bombing pause during the truce enabled 
additional weapons and ammunition to be moved south.
     North Vietnam has up to half a million men actively engaged in
reDa? ring communications networks damaged by United States bombing. Thus, their

                                     — 3 —

 efforts in the south are made considerably more difficult and costly by the 
 bombing. Without bombing it is my firm belief that the loss of allied and 
 Free World Forces lives in Vietnam would be much greater.
           There is one other comment that should be made in relation to the 
 bombing. The Free World Forces are fighting a defensive war. They are 
 trying to keep the North Vietnamese out. They are trying to establish wide- 
 spread security so that the real work of improving the lot of the people of 
 Vietnam can be pursued progressively. On the other hand the enemy do not have 
 to protect anyone; they do not have to provide any services; they only have 
 to disrupt, terrorise and attack. They are the aggressors. It is difficult 
 in any circumstances to fight a purely defensive war and at the same time 
 ,achieve your objectives. The bombing of the north is virtually the only 
'offensive weapon available to the forces of the south under the limitations 
 and restrictions that have been placed on the ground war.
          A word about the war in general. I was moderately optimistic about 
 the progress that has been made over the last 12 months. Even though there 
 has been some build—up in enemy forces and even though new weapons of a more 
 modern and damaging kind have been introduced to the theatre, the enemy has 
 made no gains. I saw for myself that security is still being extended in the 
 northern provinces where attacks from the north have been heaviest. There has 
 been steady, if at times modest, success by the Free World Forces. However, 
 it must be emphasised that no short end to this war can be expected and its 
 duration should be measured in years rather than months unless there is a drama— 
 tic change of mind on the part of the North Vietnamese. Nothing else that I 
 can see could achieve a quick end to the fighting.
          When I was in Vietnam last year the first moves were being made 
 towards establishing representative government. A constituent assembly was 
 elected to devise a constitution and elections are to be held in the next few 
 weeks to establish representative government. Elections have already been held 
 over very wide areas of the country for local village leadership. In the 
 conditions that have prevailed, I believe the steps that have so far been taken 
 in this direction are a truly remarkable achievement and I am therefore hopeful 
 that the final objective in establishing representative government can be 
 successfully attained in the programme that has already been laid down by the 
 South Vietnamese.
                                              Lists: A and B
                                              Further information:
                                  CAiJTIrRRA sMajor E. Ross—Smith
                                              (65-4061) (86-1138)
 3 August 1967                OTHER STATES:   ADPR at Command Headquarters

