<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry ballot
Description: press statement
Date: 23/11/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                               Jo,
 PRESS STATZiï;AiT :
 ï ít1L^vO"Li i
                                                      ïvovember 23rd,1965
                  The current wool industry ballot will almost certainly be 
 the last chance growers will have of deciding the future of their own 
 industry. If the ballot is not carried the industry could come under direct 
 Government control within the foreseeable future. This is because without 
 a reserve price scheme the substantial fluctuations in the price of wool are 
 certain to drive more and more consumers of wool to synthetics. Thus the 
 long term trend in the price of wool without the reserve price scheme could 
 well be pushed down and down until the point is reached at which the industry
'becomes thoroughly uneconomic.   It would be ludicrous to suggest at that 
 time that there should be another ballot on a reserve price scheme.
                  It is probable that in such circumstances the Government 
 of the day would have to make up its own mind concerning the future of the 
 industry. I hope this situation is   never reached. Thus I believe a 
 reserve price scheme will do a great deal to maintain control of the industry
 in the hands of growers.
                  I ask growers to contrast the bodies supporting the scheme 
 with those opposing it. In particular the scheme has evolved through the 
 Wool Board and the Australian Wool Industry Conference, and the Board has 
 its intimate contact with overseas trade. ìíy own enquiries directed to 
 overseas consumers of wool have shown that the Board's views of the wishes 
 of overseas traders are correct. The overseas trade dislikes fluctuations 
 in the price of wool and the significant majority replying to my enquiries 
 supported the reserve price plan as a means of overcoming fluctuations.
                  The Australian Wool Industry Conference, the growers as 
 leaders of the industry brought closest to this problem, voted 45 to 5 for
 the scheme.    The opposition to the plan is backed by three wool broking 
 firms, the largest one of which is London directed and London owned without
 Australian shareholders or Australian Directors.  This Company, the A.ii.Lb 
 and F., has spearheaded the campaign against the proposal.
                  A significant proportion of .'1e _iacarthur-Onslow Committee.
 are clients of this Compamy.     I understand two members of the ìiacarthur- 
 Onslow Group are Australian advisers to this British Company. Thus, in 
 this respect, organized opposition to the scheme is narrowly based by people 
 self-appointed to the task. The opposition has not tried to solve the 
 problems of the industry, it has tried to confuse growers by creating doubt. 
 It has tried to scare them by inaccurate assessment of the costs of the scheme. 
 It is often relatively easy to create doubt but the Board's and the industry's
 case stands clear.   It should be supported. I hope it will be.   I repeat, 
 I believe this will be the last chance the growers will have to decide the 
 future of their own industry and keep control of it for themselves. Growers 
 can only do this by voting "YES".

•                                     ..  2  ONO
       CRITIC 2., OF THE Aî1 YSI Qr T E COST OF 1HE SCH iE IiíFLIE,l) I d THE "NO" CASE

                 The estimates of cost put down in the "No" case would appear to be 
       thoroughly inaccurate. On page 2 this sentence appears - "The grower alone 
       would bear the whole cost of the scheme and his liability is unlimited." 
       Basically the growers obligation is to provide E.30. of capital which will 
       be done by a levy over a seven or eight year period. Government and Bank 
       sources have guaranteed the availability of funds after the 2,301i. is built up. 
       Beyond the £30ì•i. Trading Bank sources would provide a further 15011. Beyond 
       this there is an unlimited Government guarantee. The growers liability is 
       limited to the £30:1., but if funds are required before the £30i•i. is built up 
       they will be provided by the Government.
                 On the bottom of page 3 and on page 4 the opponents of the scheme 
       asked a question - "Are there cash benefits?". The calculation purports 
       to put the annual cost at £16.4.3. for the average grower whose case they 
       are examining, but they do not say that the annual costs for the first year, 
       on their own estimate, would only be £2.6.4. By the time the growers 
       contribution is fully paid the scheme should have engendered much more 
       confidence in the marketing of wool and have made the basic assumption that 
       the scheme would benefit 10% of the clip by 3d. a pound - an unduly 
       conservative one.
                 The "Ido" case gives no credit for the confidence that should be 
       engendered in the market by an adequate reserve price scheme which would 
       enable wool buyers to know that wool can't fall below a certain limit. At 
       the present moment, when the market breaks, buyers either stay out of the 
       market or reduce their limits because they expect a further fall and thus 
       their very action creates a further reduction in the price of wool. At 
       the moment there is no end to this process because there is no floor in the 
       price.
                 In addition, the estimates of cost included in the "No" case and 
       described on pages 3 and 4 are again quite unrealistic because they make no 
       allowance for the fact that these costs are tax deductible and this would, 
       therefore, alter all the arithmetic in the case. Each grower would have 
       to assess his own costs in relation to the prce of his own clip and he 
       would then have to do a calculation based _roon.h:;_s income to see how much
       his costs actually were.  I cannot believe that the opponents of the 
       scheme were not aware that these costs were tax deductible. This is just 
       a further attempt to confuse growers.

