<!--start metadata-->
Title: Events in Tibet
Description: press statement
Date: 24/05/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEKENT:      May 24th,1959
MALCOLM FRAER
         Australia has not paid a great deal of attention
to the unfortunate but typical happenings in the far off Himalayas.
It is quite true the National Press has given a report of what took
place, but I have not seen an analysis of what effect this could
have on future events in Far East Asia.
         For many years, even before China went Communist,
China has had a kind of suzerainty over Tibet. In other words,
Peking was to look after defence and foreign policy, the Dalai Lama
and his government were to be left free to pursue their own internal
policies.As I understand it the revolution in Tibet was
begun because the Chinese communists began to interfere in the
internal affairs of Tibet, in particular I understand they began
to interfere and to undermine the religious life of the community.
This lead directly to the rebellion which was nothing more or less
than a struggle for freedom. It is well known that the rebellion
failed and that the Dalai Lama, of his own free will, escaped to
India where he has been awarded political asylum.
         The Dalai Lama's own statement says that although
the Chinese conceded full autonomy to Tibet in the agreement made
"under pressure" in 1951, despite that agreement "after the
occupation of Tibet by the Chinese armies, the Tibetan government
did not enjoy any measure of autonomy. In practice, decisions in
all important matters were taken by the Chinese authorities."
         Even though Tibet is one of the most religious
countries in the World, and even though the religious affairs of
the nation were being disturbed by the communists the rebellion
against Peking was still a nationalist one.
         Many countries, including some Asian ones,
have compared the supression of this Tibetan rebellion to the
supression of the Hungarians in 1956. The famous and controversial
President Nasser has himself denounced communist imperialism over
the question of Tibet.
          The importance of these events and the

              2
suzerainty of future happenings carrot be underestimated. The 
fears of communist imperialism held by democratic countries of 
South Bast Asia will be reawakened. There will be suspicion of 
Peking and of the communists and of their expansive imperialist 
aims. More important may be the effect on future Indian policy, 
It is well known that Mr. Nehru has trod a delicate path between 
the East and the West; he has been on neither side. If the West 
has, at times, felt that he has been unrealistic in his assessment 
of communism and curzent world problems that, I believe, is the 
natural hangover from the British occupation of India; but now 
India is faced with the communist imperialism on their own 
borders or in a country on their own borders, and this will 
surely bring the force and danger of communism home to Indians 
much more forcibly. It may compel them to make some re-assessment 
of their foreign policies. It cannot fail to cause a great 
deal of hard thinking amongst Indian leaders.
         The events in Tibet were tragic in every way, 
as were the previous events in Hungary. It is a reminder to 
every democratic country that the benefits of freedom can only 
be maintained by constant initiative and effort.

