<!--start metadata-->
Title: Government Members' Wool Committee
Description: press statement
Date: c1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    About three or four years ago several Members of the 
Commonwealth Parliament from the Government Parties felt that 
the future prospects for the lool industry might not be quite 
es bright as they had been in the past.
    A3 a result of this several Members banded together to 
form a Government Members' Wool Committee. Nearly every wool 
producing area in Australia is represented on this Committee. 
Certain members of the Committee are members of all the 
different wool growing organisations.
    Mr. Erwin from Ballaarat and Mr. Mackinnon from Corangamite 
are both members of this Committee.
    From the beginning the Committee wanted to make a thorough 
examination of all problems related to the wool industry and in 
the initial stages the Committee concentrated on different 
lanects of research, promotion and marketing. To gain the 
knowledge of what was going on in these fields the Comeittee 
interviewed representatives from all the wool—growing or nis- 
                                            ations and from retailers, from manufacturers, from the ool 
Bureau, from our research organisations, especially from the 
textile laboratories at Geelong, and in addition the Committee 
mede extensive use of information that can be obtained from 
the various Departments of Government.
    The Committee has felt that our research orga-ieations 
are well and efficiently run, further it feels that promotion 
:Alice the re--organisation largely sponsored and pushed through 
by th energy of the present members of the Wool Bureau has 
been brought well up to date.
    In recent months the Committee has concentrated on the 
cost problem as it affects exeort industries and the wool 
industry in particular. The Committee has given thought to 
ways and means of tackling this if present atte efts to cut 
inflation are not fully effective.
                           /CONTD. Page 2.

              2.
   The Committee has realised througLout its deliberations, 
that one of the greatest problems confrontins wool—growers 
concerned marketing. The Committee has not expressed any one 
view as to what should be done about this problen, but it has 
examined the proposals put forsard by the different organisations 
and it fully supports the moves made by the Chairman of the 
'ustralian Wool 74rowers and Graziers Council, Mr. Scott, and 
by the Chairman of the Australian '!lool and Melt Organisation, 
Mr. Hislop„ who approached the Minister for Primary Industry, 
Mr. Adermann, asking for an impartial enliiry into all aspects 
of wool marketing. This proposal is at present before the 
Cabinet and an announcement should be expected shortly.
  I think leaders ot both organisations have recognised 
that this iv the only way that the marketing issue can be 
solved without increased bitterness between the organisation. 
Certainly any attempt to ram or stampede a plan through by 
referendus, without initial work of this kind, would lead to 
bitterness within the industry which might endure for twenty 
years.
  Since such friendly relations have been established by 
the two new Chairmen of the organisations it is important that 
everything be done to encourage this friendliness so that 
there sill e greater co—operation in the wool industry in 
the future.
  4 view has been put that the Gove nment has all the 
information it needs before it and that an envirs is not 
necessarily needed. I world not agree entirely with this 
view and the fact that Vir. Hitchins, the father of the "floor 
orice slan and author of "Tangled Skeins" was present when 
he deoutation visited the Minister, lends some weight to 
this view.
                /CONTD. Page 3.

   I have read most of the published documents regarding 
the eool industry, including the arrangements for the 1951 
plan welch was rejected by growers, including the 1932 Royal 
Commissien, and the various reports put out by the organis- 
ations in recent years. Reports of the South African and 
He ealand plans nave also been studied. However there 
are questions left that are unanswered. Before casting a
ote, as a wool grower, on Australia's greatest industry 
eoeld certainly like to have the enseers to the questions 
IT) my mind.
  I pose one such question : Y time of loe prices we 
enoe that all the Australian wool is still sold at a nrice. 
et know that consumptien in overseas countries is falling; 
we enow that as a general rule at these times the various 
textile mills and manufacturers are reducing stocks but 
still all our ool is sold, barring the usual small carry—over.
  It would ee interesting to know who holds this wool that 
is not going into consumption.. at these times of extremely 
low rices. An answer to this question might help in the 
solution of certain marketing problems.
  There are two main objectives which we hope to see come 
out of an impartial enquiry. The first is a solution to the 
marketing issue which has be—devilled wool industry relations 
for much too long; the second is the growth of co—operation 
end friendliness between the organisations which will enable 
the organisations te make a united approach to Governments 
on matters which vitally concern the industry. If this can 
be achieved the industry will be in a much. stronger position 
and will be much better able to safeeuard the interests of 
its members in the future difficult times that might lie ahead.

