<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australia's dependence on rural industries
Description: press statement
Date: 6/12/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 MALCOLM FR(SI R          PRESS STATEMENT 
                          December 6th,1959
    During the last year or so many people have expressed the view
that Australia is not as dependent upon its rural industries, and particularly
upon the wool industry, as it once was. People who try to argue in this
way have pointed to the recent recession in wool prices, and have said that
this has had very little effect on the rest of the economy, and despite a
30% fall in wool prices over the last two years we have been able to main-
tain a very high level of employment. These people go on to say that a
similar fall in wool prices in the early 30's resulted in 30% unemployment.
The argument then goes on that since we have survived a drastic fall in
wool prices with little effect on Australia generally therefore Australia
as a whole is not dependent upon wool prices.
    This is an extremely superficial view, and I have been quite
frankly amazed at the responsible people who have put it forward. It does
not make sense to compare the effect of a fall in wool prices in 1958 with
the effect of a similar fall in wool prices in the early 1930's. So many
other things have changed. In the 1930's Governments followed what we
called balanced budget policies. If the income of the nation fell
Government revenue would also fall, and under the ideas of the day Govern-
ment expenditure would have to be cut to keep it within its revenue. This
obviously led to a snowball effect and was one of the principle reasons
why, in the pre-war years, unemployment sometimes grew to most distressing
levels.
    Since the war Governments have, with new knowledge and greater
experience, followed different policies. If the income of the nation falls
it is the Government's duty to try and counteract this to prevent large
scale unemployment. The obvious way to do this is to spend some of the
funds and reserves that have been built up in years of especially high
income. In other words, during the very good years the Government does
not spend all the income it gets - it keeps some of the surplus to spend
in the bad years. This has a counterbalancing effect and lessens
fluctuations in employment. This is the chief difference between the
present position and the 1930's.
    Howevex, there are other factors which affect the recent situation
and which were not present in the 1930's. Australia as a whole was able
to continue its development unimpeded by the fall of wool prices for three
reasons.

                 _ 2  SIM
      We had very large overseas reserves in the United Kingdom
 which had been built up as a result of high wool prices in earlier 
 years; secondly, the U.S.A. and U.K. were experiencing a severe economic 
 slump. In the United States unemployment reached between six and seven 
 million. This meant that overseas investors were looking to Australia 
 as a more profitable place for investment than many other countries. 
 The amount of private capital invested in Australia last year almost 
 doubled compared with previous years. This again made it possible 
 for us to continue to buy the things we needed from abroad and to 
 continue our general progress.
      in the final analysis what Australia can to in the way of 
 development depends upon our overseas income. We are one of the 
 world's greatest trading nations and even though our industries are 
 stronger now than ever before we find that we are still extraordinarily 
 dependent upon overseas funds to buy essential capital equipment and, 
 in many cases, raw materials. 80A of all imports are capital equipment 
or raw materials for industry or fuel.
      If we were less dependent upon wool now than we once were 
we would expect that wool export income as a percentage of total export 
income would be less than it once was. This is not true. In the ten 
years before the war the value of wool exports as a percentage of total 
exports was an average of about 40%. In the last ten years the 
average would have been nearly 50% showing a greater and not a smaller 
dependence upon wool. In addition, over the last ten years the value 
of wool production has been a greater percentage of all the goods and 
services produced in this country than it ever was before the war.
      In the face of these facts it is difficult to see how some 
people who should know better can say that our dependence upon our 
great rural industries is less than it once was. It is quite true 
that we now know how to minimise the effect of fluctuations in export 
income or in wool income so far as the general economy is concerned, 
but that does not mean in the long term we are any less dependen#r6n 
wool or rural industries than before. For example, if we had been 
hit by the extremely low wool prices of last year without adequate 
reserves in the U.K. and if overseas investors had not chosen that 
time to send more money to Australia then every person in this country

                          3


would have been vitally and seriously affected by the fall in wool 
prices. It would hove been extremely difficult to avoid heavy
unemployment. We did not experience this because the Government 
used the high wool prices of previous years to build up adequate 
overseas reserves which would stand by us in time of need. This 
again pointa to a groat dependence on wool since those reserves 
were built up by high wool prices and by nothing else.

