<!--start metadata-->
Title: Inflation, taxation
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 31/08/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  Leader of the Opposition

   FOR PRESS        SUNDAY 31st August, 1975
                    WEDNESDAY 3rd September 197

           ELECTORAL TALK

   The Opposition has adopted the principal recommendations of 
   a report which the Government commissioned into there-ffect of 
   inflation on taxation.

   That is the major thrust of the Opposition reply to the 
   1975 Budget speech. It is what we would have done if we 
   had been in government. It is what we will do when we 
•  return to government.

   These recommendations are crucial to Australia's present 
   circumstances in two ways.

   If adopted, they will both counter inflation, and compensate 
   for inflation.

   What Mathews recommended, as the result of an inquiry 
   commissioned by the government last year, was tax indexation. 
   for individual wage earners and inflation accounting for 
   industry.
•
   There is almost universal support for these two important
   reforms.

   They were urged last year by the Australian Council of 
   Trade Unions during the pre budget discussions.

   The report was signed by Mr Jolly, the Australian Council 
   of Trade Unions's Industrial Advocate.

   The recommendations on company taxation are hailed by 
   firms and businesses.


  Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600

             -2-

The situation we have now is that taxation of incomes 
increases at a faster rate than wages, because the 
scales are progressive. The Government expects wages to 
go up by 22 per cent this year. It expects its take 
from P.A.Y.E income tax to go up by 43 per cent.

That is the key equation in the whie of the government's 
expenditure programme of the past two and a half years.

That is why the present Prime Minister was ablt to promise 
so confidently in 1972 that he would not raise income taxes to 
pay for Labor's schemes.

He knew that the combination of inflation and the ~progressive 
tax scales made this promise a false one

The Government's so called budget reforms, the rebate system, 
does not change the situat on. The scales are still progressive. 
The take from income tax is still a rip off.

The Government set up the Mathews Committee to stall trade 
union pressure for genuine reforms, and then when the 
committee made its recommendations, it rejected them.

Indexing means that if wages go up by 22 per cent this year, 
income tax receipts would go up by 22 per cent, instead of 
by twice that proportion.

The change would be drastic, which is why we would introduce 
it over three years, but in the first year we are committed to 
making the real return 500 million dollars.

Tax reforms on this scale would mean a lifting of pressure on 
the trade union leadership to demand wage increases which 
industry cannot afford. It would mean a lifting of pressure 
on industry's costs. It would mean more pay in the pay
packet and lower prices in the supermarkets.

          -3-

The second vital recommendation in the Mathews Report, 
which the Government spurned, and which we accept, 
concerns inflation accounting.

The last charge before firms strike their taxable profits is 
depreciation - the allowance which enables industry to 
renew its capital equipment as it wears out.

That allowance is based on what the capital equipment 
actually cost, and not on what would be needed to replace 
it-when it is finally written off and worn out. With -prices 
going up by 16 per cent last year and by 16 per cent again 
this year, there is a big difference.

That is why in real terms, when replacement cost accounting 
is substituted for historical cost accounting, private industry 
overall made a loss last year estimated at 480 million dollars.

The Mathews recommendations for company tax reform would also 
be implemented over three years. Our assistance to industry' 
would total 500 million dollars in the first year.

These reforms would achieve a political purpose as 
well as an economic purpose, and they would help every 
Australian taxpayer.

They would restore responsiblity to government. We have 
had a situation in Australia where the Federal Government's 
revenue increases..;co:nstantly because of the combination 
of progressive taxIscales and inflation.



It has been able to increase taxes without announcing the 
increase. Once indexation is introduced, if the Government 
wants to raise additional money, it will have to make out 
a case for a tax increase. We will know where we are 
going, and what it will cost.

The Government rejected tax indexation for ideological 
reasons. It wants to control our lives and make 
our decisions.

The Opposition is adopting tax indexation because we 
want to restore to individuals the right to make their 
own decisions about how they spend their money.

The Government left the private sector floundering because 
it wants to continue to expand the range of its activities 
at the expense of the private sector.

The Opposition is adopting company tax reform because 
it wants to restore a free and prosperous Australia, in 
which there are opportunities for individuals and work 
for those who are willing.

In Government we know the task will not be easy. I 
believe it would take a full three years to get us back 
on the sensible and responsible path of progress.

However I would also hope and expect that a Liberal 
National Country Party Government would be able to make 
an immediate impact for the better in the business sector.
Just when that time will come is in the hands of the •
Prime Minister, who can call an election when he chooses.

I have seen reports that he gave an interview on television in 
which he said that he was prepared for an election campaign 
against me and that he would win it.

Election contests are not gladiatorial contests between 
two persons. They are the occasion provided to the electorate 
to choose between parties and policies.

•
t 1 k ~        -5-


    I am confident that the policies which the Australian people 
    want are the Opposition policies and that the Government 
    which it wants and would choose is the Liberal National 
    Country Party Coalition Government.


    We are ready for that campaign when it comes. If the 
    Prime minister is so confident he can always provide the 
    opportunity.

