<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Industry Development Corporation
Description: radio talk
Date: 24/05/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK
The House of Representatives during the week passed a bill to set up a new 
institution called the Australian Industry Development Corporation. When this 
bill was introduced earlier this month, the Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr. 
John McEwen said the government believed it was taking a major step forward in 
policies for development and for Australian ownership. Its role, broadly, is to 
assist Australian interests in marshalling financial resources--particularly from
overseas--for major industrial development. It will direct itself to giving 
assistance in ways which will help Australian companies to gain or preserve a 
greater Australian participation than otherwise would be the case.
The Minister outlined the needs in this area for a rapidly developing Australia. 
Australia had emerged as one of the most competitive suppliers of basic materials 
for the industries of the world. Traditionally, exports of rural origin had earned 
the bulk of our export income. But we had to increase our industrial exports and 
get the maximum return we could from exports of our mineral resources. We had a 
ready—made opportunity to develop further exports of industrial products from 
our abundance of high—grade, competitively priced raw materials. Each ton of 
iron ore, bauxite or other resources processed to just one further stage would 
multiply its earnings many times over.
The Government approved and would continue to encourage the inflow of investment 
from abroad. But it was a matter for national concern that overseas capital was 
usually obtained on terms which had resulted in predominantly foreign ownership of 
many of our greatest industrial enterprises and fastest growing industries. In 
1969 alone at least 15 Australian—owned companies, with assets worth $100 million, 
disappeared from the lists of the two largest stock exchanges because of takeover 
by overseas interests. Overseas takeovers were not necessarily bad, and they may 
be part of the process of an Australian industry growing up and becoming more 
efficient. But too frequently when the Australian partner could not meet his share 
of the capital requirements, he would at best become the minor partner in the new 
enterprise. We could not let ourselves be lulled into feeling that all was well 
because aggregate figures showed only 20 to 25 percent foreign ownership of
manufacturing.  A deeper look revealed a vastly different picture. If we looked 
at the situation in factories with over 20 employees it was found that the motor 
vehicle industry was nearly 90 percent foreign owned, and there were other such 
examples.
Some foreign firms were not prepared to allow any Australian participation in their 
ventures. But a growing number were willing to have, and even seek, Australian 
participation to the point of an effective Australian voice in the board room. These 
companies, however, often could not find Australian interests able to take part 
with them to the extent necessary to achieve a significant element of Australian 
ownership.

                               — 2 -
What will the Industry Development Corporation do to help solve these problems? 
Mr. McEwen-talked about the gap in the financial resources available to 
Australia; as distinct from foreign, firms operating in Australia. The Government 
believed that the AIDC would help fill this gap. It was aimed at getting more 
of the overseas capital in non—equity form--to tap these capital sources by 
means of loans, and less in overseas ownership in Australian industry. The 
AIDC is seen as a body which would assist Australian industry to expand its 
capacity and scope, and increase its efficiency and competitiveness. It should 
assist in retaining and expanding Australian ownership of industry and resources. 
It will have the capacity to help wherever existing banking and other financial 
institutions cannot meet the financial and investment needs of Australian 
companies for development and expansion. It will help in cases where the 
development would otherwise not take place, or would otherwise be possible 
only with undue loss of ownership and control to overseas interests. It would 
be in a position to assist an Australian venture that sought its help to 
undertake a viable and important industry development, and would be equipped 
especially to help projects in export industries and industries founded on 
Australia's natural resources.
It is proposed to establish the Corporation with a capital of $100 million, 
paid up initially to $25 million.
There was some public controversy surrounding the proposed Corporation. Some 
national organisations had doubts that the bill had sufficient safeguards to 
preserve the interests of private enterprise, while others threw in their 
support and expressed the view that various safeguards in the bill removed the
possibility of extensive Government ownership of industry through the 
Corporation's operations. In the House several Government members spoke out 
against the bill, and several minor amendements were accepted. There was, 
however, overwhelming support for the proposal.
In his earlier speech Mr. McEwen gave some assurances about the new institution-- 
what it could do, what it could not do. It would be, he said, a body entirely 
set apart from Government and operating only within the charter set down for it 
in the legislation. It was structured to become entirely a part of the private 
enterprise scene. It would be subject to taxes on exactly the same footing as 
any public company. It would assist only viable projects, and was not designed
to be a supporter of lost or doubtful causes. The Corporation must not seek 
a controlling interest in enterprises with which it became involved. It would 
have to regularly review any investments it had acquired in the course of giving 
help to various projects, and must dispose of those holdings which were no longer

                                      — 3
necessary to its policy objectives. These provisions were designed to ensure 
that the Corporation did not become a dominant element in the ownership of an 
industry, but continually turned over its borrowed funds to provide similar 
assistance in other areas. The bill made it clear that the Corporation may 
assist in a venture only when its assistance was sought. It must not become 
involved in any enterprise except with the consent of the company concerned. 
No existing institution or firm need fear it as a competitor. It would not 
have the status or privileges of a bank, nor would it function like a bank.
It would be able to operate without the limitations that were necessary or usual
in the field of banking. The corporation would be able to participate
in projects alongside private enterprise companies, assisting them in the 
provision of the financial resources needed. But, having become a participant, 
it would be required to play only a passing role. As soon as it could 
adequately recoup its financial outlays in a project successfully developed, 
it would move onto other projects. Its borrowings in Australia would not 
only be a minor part of its total borrowings, but would also be expressly 
subject to limitation by the Reserve Bank.

