<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor's promises: wheat episode recalled
Description: For press
Date: c 1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


T

   FOR PRESS:
   Release by Malcolm Fraser:

           LABOR'S PROMISES: WHEAT EPISODE RECALLED
        When a political party or a candidate makes election promises, 
   those promises must be backed up with facts when under challenge.
        In a recent declaration during the Bendigo by—election campaign, 
   the Labor candidate Mr Kennedy promised primary producers a return to the 
   "orderly marketing system" as established by the A.L.P.
        This referred to the policies of Labor when the Party was last 
   in Government before 1949.
        Mr Kennedy's promise had a ring of irony about it, because it was 
   the Labor Government which in 1945 concluded a wheat deal with New Zealand 
   that caused years of bitter reaction from the wheatgrowers of this country.
        This was the sale of 18 million bushels of wheat to New Zealand 
   at a price — 5/9d. — a bushel — that was well below the ruling world price 
   at that time.
        Details of this remarkable piece of "orderly marketing" were 
   disclosed only after persistent questioning of the Labor ministers by the 
   then Opposition.
        Mr John McEwen, then in Opposition, and now of course Minister 
   for Trade and Industry, led the move to have details of the deal made public 
   and to seek financial redress for Australia's wheatgrowers.
        During the currency of this wheat deal with New Zealand the world 
   price for wheat climbed to 17/— a bushel, and later even beyond that level. 
   Compare this with the 5/9d. negotiated by the Labor Government with the then 
   New Zealand Labor Government at the time
        Effect of this "orderly" marketing was to keep down the return to 
   growers from sales of their wheat instead of alloying them access to the 
   higher world prices.
        In 1947 Mr McEwen denounced the Government's actions as "barefaced 
   lying, suppression of facts, evasion and equivocation and brazen and shameless 
   deception".
        Remided in Parliament of the deal during last week, Mr McEwen 
   recalled that it was the Opposition of which he was then a member which 
   brought the facts of this deal to public notice.
        "I hope Labor will never be in a position to control 'orderly 
   marketing' along these lines ever again," Mr McEwen told Parliament.
        Compare this Labor policy with the Government's own policies in
   this field.

                2.

     The Government and the wheat industry have faced the industry's 
problems side by side, co—operating to ensure the success of measures 
introduced to cope with the present world wheat glut and thus preserve the 
stability of this great industry.

 VIVIEì??dE 

  I will 'phone you to either c r this press 
statement or to have it altered.
  It is for all electorate papers.

  If it is to be usable by the papers, it would need to 
be typed, copied and sent by mail by the most sppedliest,
    process. rocess. It would have to get t a;;a - in the 
earliest possible mail if the intricacies and
inexplicabilities of the GPO machinations are to be 
thoroughly defeated.
 I wish you luck and Godspeed.

            --Syd.










    d,d-ug-r1


 *71

   For Press;'
   .eleeee         -theeteekee
                Libor's 'Promises: neat Episode Lecalled.

      rWhen a political party or a candidate makes election promises, those 

   prOMiGOG El st be backed up with facts when -under challenge.

   In a recent declaration during the Berdigo by–election campaign, the Labor 

   candidate Mr. Kennedy promieed primary producers a return to the "orderly

   marketing system" as established by the A.L.P.------.,
   This referred to the policies of iiim Labor when. the Party was last in
                ----          --.
   Government t11014 before 1949.

   Mr. Kennedy's promise had a ring of irony aboet it, because it was the Labor 

   dovernment which in 1945 concluded a wheal:deal with New Zealand that caused 

   -ears of bitter reaction from the wheatgroeers of this country.

       a was the sale of 18 million bushels of wheat to New Zealand at a price
                                        r-----,
   _5/9d. a bushel—that was 41 well below the ruling worl                              ce at the time.

      tails of this remarkable piece of "orderly marketing"                            disclosed only

   after persistent questioning of the Labor ministers by the then Opposition. 

   Mr.TohnNcEeren, then in Opposition, and now of course Minister for Trade and 

   Industry, led the move to have details of the deal made public and to Seek 

   Xigimasst financial redress for Austrelia's wheatgrowers.

   The then Labor Government wes forced to dip liwivily into public fund a to 

   the tune of some Z7 million to make amends in some way to Austrelia'e wheat 

   growers,

ffusing the currency of this whet deal with New Zealand the world price for 

   whet climbed to 17/– a buehel, and later even beyond that level. Compere this 

   with the 5/9d. neeotiated by the Labor Government with the then Yew Zealand 

   Labor Government at the time!

Offect of this "orderly" marketing was to keep down the rote= to growers 

   from seles of their wheat instead of allowing them access to the hijier world 

   prices.

       1947 Mr. McEwen denoenced the gGovernment's actions as "barefaced lying, 

   suppression of fA.cts, evasion and equivocation and brazen and shameless decept- 

   ion." ITeminded in Parliament of the deal during last week, Mr. McEwen recalled 

   that it was the Opposition of which he was then a member which forced the Labor
                                           If
   Government to beat a retreat on the deal, and to restore some justice to the 

   wheatgro,iers. "I hope Labor will never be in a position to control 'orderly

   marketing along these lines ever again," Mr. McEwen told Parliament.

     Compare this Labor policy with the Geyer mentos own enlightened policies 

    in this field. The Government and the wheat industry have faced the inde3try's 

   problems side by side, co–operating to ens re the success of measures introduced 

    to cope with the present world wheat glut and thus preserve the stability of 

    this great industry.







   .0.01^0111.

