<!--start metadata-->
Title: Economy, employment, price control, 35-hour week
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 5/03/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                        3HA Sunday 5/3/72
         TEXT OF RADIO BROADCAST BY     3LK Tues.  7/3/72 

         THE HON. MALCOLIVI FRASER, M.P.3YB Thurs. 9/3/72



         Last week, Federal Parliament debated a statement by 

         the Treasurer, Mr. Snedden, on the Australian economy, 
         and I took the opportunity to speak in his support.

         Much has been written and said about the state of our 

         economy in recent months, and today I shall discuss some 
         aspects of it.

•        First, employment. Under successive Liberal-Country Party 

         Governments Australia has experienced a period of full 

         employment quite unparalleled in our history and, for 
         that matter, in the history of many other countries. Of 
         course, we recognise there is a problem of unemployment - 
         we have responded to it by lifting the unemployment 

         benefits substantially and by providing State Governments 
         with grants now totalling $4.5 million a month to create 
         employment in rural areas. This is in addition to the 
•        millions of dollars provided to the States at the last 
         Premiers' Conference. But our unemployment rate is only a 

         mere fraction of those in other countries. In the United 
         States, for instance, it is 5.9 per cent, in Great Britain 

         5.8 per cent, and in Canada 6.2 per cent.

         Turning to inflation, the Treasurer has conceded that this 

         is a problem which is giving the Government concern. While 
         the current rate of inflation in Australia is greater than 

         it is in some other advanced countries, over the long term,

         our efforts in this area are better than those of most 
         other nations.
                                                .../2

                2.

      A key indicator of the wisdom of our economic management 
      was the applause the Commonwealth received from all 
      Premiers after the Premiers' Conference in Canberra last 
      month. This was made more meaningful when one considers 
      that two of the six Premiers are Labor leaders.
      I turn now to the policies of the Opposition in the
      economic field because we must examine these if we are to 
      have any idea of their handling of the nation's affairs if 
      they became the Government.
•     First, the A.L.P. has a policy of price control. The 
      Leader of the Opposition has a policy of price justification. 
      How the two - the A.L.P. and its leader - would attempt 
      to reconcile their differences over this is anyone's guess. 
      But talking about price control, the A.L.P. would establish 
      maximum prices, yet at the same time would support a system 
      of arbitration establishing minimum wages. In many cases, 
      Australia's wages tribunals take into account price levels. 
      And so, immediately there is a basic conflict in the 
•     Opposition's two proposals - minimum wage fixing and maximum 
      price fixing. I suggest that no economy could be operated 
      on that basis.
      The A.L.P. has a policy of a 35-hour week - a 35-hour 
      week at a time when there are immense tasks facing us in 
      our efforts to build a bigger, better and greater Australia.
      How can we achieve this goal, how can we acquire the 
      better standard of living we all seek, with a 35-hour
      working week? The Treasurer has indicated that the increased
                            .../3

                3.




      costs to the total Australian community resulting from 
      a 35-hour week would be about $2600 million a year. I 
      can recall only a few months ago telling you about the 
      35-hour week's impact specifically on rural communities - 
      how it would reduce the net income of woolgrowers by 
      40 per cent and that of dairy farmers by 37 per cent. And 
      yet the A.L.P. is pledged to impose this on the community - 
      a community which I believe generally rejects such a 
      measure as a real threat to our economic progress and 
•     well-being.
      At the rural level, Dr. Patterson is perhaps the only 
      person in the A.L.P. with any knowledge of rural affairs. 
      Yet last year, he was publicly supporting assistance to 
      primary industries while his A.L.P. colleagues were 
      busily resolving at their Federal Conference to withdraw 
      Government support from them. In Dr. Patterson's own 
      words, if the A.L.P. caucus followed the conference 
      decision, "it means we will have to vote against the 
•     Wheat Stabilisation Bill, Dairy Industry, the various wool 
      commitments, and the Australian Wool Commission". These 
      are the words of Dr. Patterson, the only expert in the 
      A.L.P. on rural affairs. Yet he was excluded from the 
      A.L.P. conference at Launceston where policy was framed.

      My main point in this is that past experience has shown 
      that the Parliamentary Leaders of the A.L.P. will always 
      give way to the pressure from the left-wing dominated 
      A.L.P. organisation. Recent evidence has shown that 
      Dr. Patterson hasn't a chance. He will be virtually a

                            .../4

                4.



     voice in the wilderness. If Labor ever becomes the 
     Government we can fully expect no help for rural 
     subsidies. Mr. Whitlam proved this for us last year 
     when, within 36 hours, he was forced by union pressure 
     on his Parliamentary caucus to reverse his announced 
     intention to include fines under certain circumstances 
     on striking workers.

     Summing up, the Australian economy has a basic underlying 
     strength. The 35-hour week and withdrawal of rural 
•    subsidies are not the devices to which a responsible 
     Government, concerned with steady growth in the nation's 
     economy, will resort.

