<!--start metadata-->
Title: Canberra development
Description: press statement
Date: 23/07/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    PRESS STATEMENT

                                                           July 23rd,1961

                                       CANBERRA DEVELOPMENT
                          For a considerable time it has been common to hear people
                    saying that too much building is going on at Canberra. That 
                    the Lakes shouldn't be built at Canberra, and that Canberra 

                    is a luxury City as compared with other Australian cities.
                          About six months ago one of the Australian major national 
                    papers devoted a series of articles which would lead one to 
                    these conclusions.
                            quite frankly I have no apologies to make for the 
                    development that has been undertaken at Canberra. But because 
                    this matter is one that has aroused controversy and, at times, 

                    not a little hostility, I thought it only right that I should 
                    set out the reasons for my support of Canberra's development 
                    as the Australian Capital.

                            In the first instance, we should remember that we are 
                    not trying to decide whether we should have a Capital at
                    Canberra.  This was a decision made in 1911, and that decision 

N                   committed future generations to a very great expenditure, an 
                    expenditure that would convert something that wasn't even a 
                    country town into a Capital that was worthy of the Australian
                    nation.  If the decision had to be made over again very 
                    strong arguments on financial and other grounds could be made 

                    for placing the Capital in a different area where development
                    would clearly be much less expensive. but the decision was 
                    made, and the current generations of Australians are stuck 
                    with the decision.
                             For a great number of years very little was done

                    about canberra development.  The basic lay-out of the City 

                    was planned, many fine trees were planted, but little was done 
                    to try and create a Capital of which we could all be proud. 
 •
                    Indeed, the pace as regards Canberra's development has not 
                    been set by Australians, it has been set by representatives 
                    of overseas countries who have built truly magnificent

                    Embassies and Chancelleries. Many overseas countries erected 
                    buildings that put Australia's pre-fabricated fibrous plaster 
                    buildings completely to shame. The Americans were the first 
                    to set the lead in this regard, but many others have followed - 
                    the Belgians, the French, the Germans, Israel and Malaya, 
                    to name a few.

                              Australian Governments since the war have given a 
                    lot more thought to the development of the Australian Capital, 

                    and over the last ten or a dozen years we have reached a stage
                    in which much has been done. However, it is still worth 

                    noting that the last fibrous plaster temporary buildings to 

                   house officers of the Immigration Department was put up not 

                    less than five years ago.

                               When you look at the money spent by the National

                                      2 -
              Capital Development Commission, the body responsible for
              Canberra's development, you must remember that this Commission 
              is responsible for all the expenditure that in the States is 
              undertaken either by Shire of Municipal Councils or by State 
              Governments. There is no State Government in Canberra and there 
              is no local Government and, therefore, the very heavy expenditure 
              incurred by these two bodies all enter into the Budget of the 
              National Capital Development Commission.
                     Under this sort of expenditure roads must be built, drains 
              instituted, electric supplies expanded, schools and hospitals 
              provided for a growing population and other things of this kind. 
              In addition, offices have to be provided for the growing number 
              of public servants in Canberra. Growing, not because the number 
              of public servants is increasing, but growing because a decision 
              was made many years ago to gradually move all the Commonwealth 
              Departments from the Capital cities of the States to Canberra. 
              This, obviously, necessitated a tremendous program of building 
              in the Capital.
                      This move on behalf of the Commonwealth has been of some 
              advantage to the two larger States of Victoria and New South Wales. 
              Houses have had to be provided in Canberra for the public servants 
              being moved to the Capital in addition to the offices which I
              mentioned. This has made office space and homes available in 
              the Capitals of Melbourne and Sydney which would not normally 
              have become available, and this move has, therefore, helped to 
              relieve the pressures in these two cities and has assisted the 
              two Governments concerned in meeting the shortages of both homes 
              and offices in Sydney and Melbourne.
                       Perhaps the most controversial of all Canberra's
              development programs is the decision to go ahead with the Lakes
•             project. It is worth noting that the Lakes program was envisaged 
              from the very start and it is only now, more than 50 years after 
              the choosing of Canberra as a site, that something is being 
              done about it.
                        The Lake itself is not going to cost very much, and 
              when it is completed it will flood the two or three dairy farms 
              that are now found right in the centre of Australia's capital.
                        However, the bridge across the Lake will be fairly
              expensive. These bridges are necessary irrespective of whether 
              or not the Lake is constructed. At the moment there is only one 
              narrow high-level bridge across the flood plain that divides 
              Canberra in two. The others are low-level bridges that flood 
              five or six times a year, and when they do the traffic jams are 
              much worse than anything that you would see in Melbourne or
              Sydney. High level bridges to avoid the traffic jams are essential.
                         In addition to this some of the important buildings
              that in future years will be built in Canberra will be placed
              around the Lake shore, and it is not possible to go ahead with
              the planning of the siting of these buildings until the Lake is

                                           3

                  completed.
                          Perhaps one of the strongest criticisms is that More 
                  is done in Canberra than in other Cities, but this isn't so. 
                  Development of Canberra as a City has lagged far behind the
                  Cities of the States.   We haven't heard too many people
                  grumbling about the King's Street Bridge, or the Cultural
                  Centre on the old Wirth's Circus Site, which will cost Victoria
                  about £8M, or the Opera House in Sydney which is also going to
                  cost many millions of £'s. and all this while Canberra hasn't
                  even yet got a National Library. The National Library collection
                  of books, some of which are priceless historic items and of
                  particular value to Australia, are housed in Nissen huts, and
                  these are damp and a full time staff is involved in taking care
                  of these volumes and bringing them out to dry them so that they
                  don't get mildew and decay.
                          It has also been said that because of the so-called
                  credit squeeze development in Canberra should have been slowed
                  down. To some extent it was in the last Budget. C.S.I.R.O.
                  had been hoping to get a building for their Division of Land
                  Research, which has been responsible for most of the planning
                  of the development in areas of northern Australia. This
                  Division is also housed in old wartime huts and this is a most
                  unsatisfactory way for a division to conduct its business.
                  It leads to inefficiency and bad liaison which could all be
                  avoided by proper quarters.
                           However, this particular Division of C.S.I.R.O. may
                  now have to wait up to ten years before a building can be
                  properly constructed for its officers.
                            It is worth recalling that there isn't a State in
                  the Commonwealth that has reduced or slowed down its long term 
                  development plans because of current economic measures, and 
•                 indeed these long term plans are essential to the sound progress 
                  of the nation if we are to continue to develop Australia as 
                  rapidly as we wish to, and if we are going to continue to
                  maintain our migrant intake as we hope to and wish to.
                             There are only two other points that I would like to
                  make .
                             Without a proper Capital Australians have no central 
                  unifying point towards which they can look. The Capital of a 
                  country is a symbol of that country's nationhood. Australia 
                  has done very well for a long time without that symbol - it 
                  will do better I believe with a proper capital towards which 
                  people can turn.
                             Also, we must remember that Canberra is now the 
                  shop window of Australia so far as the rest of the world is
                  concerned.  Before the war representatives of foreign countries 
                  were nearly all housed in Melbourne or Sydney, now they all
                  live in Canberra.  Governmental visitors from overseas who 
                  wish to negotiate with the Government all go to Canberra, where

                                          4 -
                 before the war they would probably not even go to the Capital. 
                 It is important that these visitors realise that Australia has 
                 a sense of pride and responsibility so far as its own capital 
                 is concerned.
                            While I have made what I believe to be a strong 
                 case in support of Canberra's development I would not support 
                 any move in Canberra that I believed to be extravagant or that
                 I believed to be wasteful. I would only ask people who 
                 oppose development in Canberra to come to Canberra and see for 
                 themselves so that they can judge at first hand.
                            I hope if they do come to Canberra they will come 
                 while Parliament is sitting and then I will be there and maybe 
                 will be able to assist in their visit.




Oa











 •

