<!--start metadata-->
Title: Diesel tax
Description: radio talk
Date: 29/11/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT - WEEK ENDING 29/11/57






        vhsg the Gawarrerten 
unanimous support from the 
because di the purpose for     rrhit
Members were unhappy ,eheut     eyatsm under             y prceeâuasrs
ware  goingo be exempt from the t+ez. The os n        mooned
cumbersome and vnreeIittict.
        I am h#epp3t  soy that this                       eltered
st the request of,      beck bsncahere     the fell      atatement
        t the posi tien.
        There bee been some confusion co             toot     hereby
         produ€teerll n-i1 macle exempt from the Diesel Tex. This
          has now been     'fled. Original/y, consumers who used
 less then g0,000 gall +mis e year would have had to pay the tax 9nd t:hti
once every 3 min ha         a rebate. Now, with the co—operation 
 of ttrp ,-`il Companies, it hsa been found possible to issues certifies 
 which will enable primary producers to obtain their diesel supplies 
without pgying the :ax to long as they buy their supplies in 
 yusntitietia of one 44—g®li.on drum or mores.
        This wi,llgreatly simplify the
 prodatera have their certificates of titxe~pti ea~~ i t 
 them of the onus of having to claim a rebattit every a s~
   °ples have already paid tax on fuel that has been bought in
 reaerst waeket. They will have to pet in their claims for rebates 
 on this fuel, taut I strongly urge primary producers not to pat in 
 their claims until they have their certificate of exemption. Then 
 they need mobs only one claim and thereafter, with their
 certificate of exemption, they will he able to buy their fee

 drums free of tax.

                             4001.01111011110111111111111MIONIK

                      PRESS STATELEN T


            The Minister for Customs and Excise, Senator Denham

Henty, ann,unced to-day that the Government had reconsidered the 

procedures previously agreed upon in regard to the tax on Diesel
Fuel.  Altered arrangements will now a° ply in respect of the 

issue of Diesel Fuel Certificates, to persons who use automotive 

diesel fuel for purposes other than propelling road vehicles on 
public roads.
            Previously the issue of Certificates which, in effect, 

enabled purchases to be made for exempt purposes free of the 1/-

per gallon duty was restricted to persons who used in the vicinity
of 20,000 gallons per annum. After a review of the whole position, 

and further consultation with the oil companies, arrangements are 
now in hand whereby the certificate system will be extended to all

persons who use the fuel other than in road vehicles.
            It is expected that new forms on which to make application 

for a certificate will be available from diesel fuel suppliers
within two or three weeks. Persons entitled to a certificate under 

the new procedure should make application as soon as the new forms
are available.  Whereas previously these applications were to be 

forwarded to the Comptroller-General of Customs, Canberra, the 

forms should now be sent to the Collector of Customs in the State
in which the applicant resides. Residents in the Australian 

Capital Territory and the Northern Territory should send the forms 
to the Department in Canberra.
             Senator Henty went on to say that rebates of the 1/- 

per gallon duty in respect of fuel purchased up to the time of
the issue of a certificate will be paid. Claim forms already 

in the hands of suppliers are to be used for this purpose and it 

will facilitate procedures for both the claimants and his

Department if claims for rebate be not made until the applicant
has received his Diesel Fuel Certificate. He could then cover all 

his purchases which included 1/- per gallon duty in one rebate claim.


Department of Customs and Excise, 
CANBERRA. A.C.T.
27th November, 1957.                        ~UJit~ tfi¢ Earn-pfim¢nto

                                                      o~

                                           Venatoz ciDen~iam Xentj.

