<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: Radio talk
Date: c1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence

         In this talk resuming the "Our Australia" series I want to discuss 
some of the main points of the 1970 Budget and to give some more information 
of interest to people who live in the country. My colleague, the Treasurer 
Mr. Bury, pointed out the need for a large increase of expenditures, and that 
the increases proposed were in the high—priority class. He emphasised that 
these had to be scrutinised closely because the economy was still threatened 
by disruptive inflation.
         The Budget brought good news for the lower and middle income earner. 
There is to be a reduction of some 10 per cent in tax payable on taxable 
incomes up to $10,000. Above that level, the reduction will taper off and 
cease altogether at a higher bracket. The Government had already pointed 
out the way the present scales had shifted a growing share of the weight of 
taxation on to personal income taxpayers. The new rates are to apply to 
1970-71 incomes and a new scale of tax instalment deductions from wages and 
salaries will operate from October 1 this year. Savings in tax resulting from the
cuts are very worthwhile. For instances, the tax payable on a taxable income of $2,500
was over $331, and this will fall by nearly $33. On a taxable invomce of $3,500 tax
payable was over $609, and this will drop by over $60.


         Before I go on with the main items of help for primary producers, 
I want to mention the relief provided in the Budget for rural telephone 
subscribers. This follows a long struggle and will save country people 
hundreds and in some cases thousands of dollars as well as bringing to 
country people the advantages of city dwellers. The Post Office is now to 
provide and maintain free of charge lines for telephone exchange services up
to a 15—mile radius from the exchange concerned. It will also provide and
maintain lines extending beyond the 15 miles point at a flat rate once-only
charge of $40 for each quarter-mile beyond that 15 miles. These measures are
to apply retrospectively from January 1 last year. There were postal and 
telephone charge rises, but these were introduced to avoid losses and to help 
finance expansion programs. I will discuss them at a later date.
         The Budget reflected the Government's general and continuing concern 
for the welfare of primary industry. In fact, Commonwealth payments to the 
rural industries in the various subsidies and other forms of aid are estimated 
to reach more than $215 million in the present financial year — over $77 million 
more than in 1969-70. These payments included more than $30 million for wheat 
industry stabilisation, $21 million for devaluation compensation, $56.5 million 
in phosphate fertiliser bounty and nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy, and

                                      2.

$41.5 million in butter and cheese bounties.
         I now come to the wool industry. The Budget provided for the 
expenditure of $30 million of Commonwealth funds as a short—term measure of 
help for those woolgrowers most in need as a result of prolonged drought and 
the disastrously low wool prices. Later,,the Minister for Primary Industry, 
Mr. Anthony provided details. He emphasised the great importance of the wool 
industry to the Australian economy and said it was essential the industry's 
viability be preserved. The 1969-70 season, he said, was an exceptionally
difficult time for the industry. Although Government aid had been of
material assistance in drought areas, many producers also had to bear costs of
drought feeding, losses from forced sales of stock at low prices and the death
of a proportion of their flocks. The Government had been giving detailed
consideration to the problems being experienced by woolgrowers, and the ways
which were open to place the industry on a sound basis. The present crisis
required a comprehensive approach which involved both immediate and long—term
measures. Short—term urgent measures are clearly needed to prevent a loss of
confidence in the industry.
         The emergency aid will be available to those growers largely dependent
on wool and whose incomes fell markedly in 1969-70. Because individual entitlements
depend on the number applying, it is not possible to announce the extent of
entitlements, but payments will range from $50 up to $1500. To be eligible for
full assistance, grower' gross income from wool must make up at least half of
their total gross income from all sources in the year ended June 30th last year.
Aid ceases at the point where gross income from wool is one—third of income from
 all sources. Mr Anthony has said it was considered reasonable to expect the
grower to carry some of the loss incurred as a normal hazard of producing wool.
Thus the assistance is based on half the 16 percent average fall in wool prices
in 1969-70 that is, eight percent. Let's take an example — a grower whose income
from wool in 1968-69 was, say $4,000. Eight percent of this is deducted, leaving
$3,680. In 1969-70 the grower's income from wool proved to be $3,060, leaving a
shortfall of $620 compared with his 'adjusted' previous year's income. Provided
the $30 c..]lion allocated was sufficient to meet all claims in full, this grower
would receive the grant of $620.
         I would advise woolgrowers eligible for this aid to submit their
applications promptly. As it is designed to meet an emergency situation, it
should be made available as soon as possible. Woolgrowers must submit their
applications by November 30th, and application forms will be available from
post offices within a few weeks. As total entitlements cannot be calculated until
all applications are in, it is proposed to make an early interim payment on each
claim.

                                    3.
         This emergency aid should go some way in helping hard—hit growers 
to survive the immediate crisis. But I emphasise that the important thing is
to get on with the long—term proposals for the industry. I know that Doug Anthony
will be making every effort he ca4  ring these long—term proposals before Cabinet 
as soon as possible — proposals that include significant improvement to wool 
marketing, research into industry problems and debt re—construction.
     The increasing involvement by the Commonwealth in assistance to the 
States was reflected in the substantially larger amounts in payments to the 
States for the current financial year. In total, these payments are estimated 
at $2,708 million — $291 million more than last year. These payments to the 
States will absorb one—third of the entire Budget and account for more than 
one—third of the estimated increase of $795 million in total Commonwealth spending 
for the year.
         What do these figures mean? Let us take a close look at how these 
funds are channelled out to the States and what areas they benefit, with 
particular reference to Victoria. At the end of June at the Premiers Conference 
in Canberra, the States received a new deal in financial assistance from the 
Commonwealth. The formula under which Commonwealth grants to the States are
determined was made more generous. This will result in considerably larger 
amounts being made available for the States for the new five—year period, 1970-71 
to 1974-75. The Commonwealth also moved to take over a portion of State debt, 
and to relieve the States of debt charges by making interest—free grants 
starting at $200 million in 1970-71 as part of the works and housing loan 
programmes.
         I will deal first with the formula grants. These funds, from the 
uniform taxation pool, are shared out to enable the States to pay for a wide 
range of important community services. Under the old formula, Victoria received 
over $1170 million in the five—year period. Under the new formula it is estimated 
Victoria will receive $2,072 million. In 1969-70 the State received over $283 
million, and in 1974-75 it is estimated to get $510 million under the new formula. 
It is estimated Victoria will receive $324.5 million in 1970-71.
         By taking over $200 million of State debt at the beginning of each 
of the next five years, by the beginning of 1974-75 the Commonwealth will be 
meeting debt charges on a full $1,000 million of State debt.
         Victoria and New South Wales received extra funds under the grants 
formula with an additional $2 per head of population. This was given because 
of the tendency of the per—capita levels in the two big States to continue 
to fall below the level of the other States. It(will result in Victoria's 
receiving an extra $36 million it would not have got over the five—year period. 
Taking into account all revenue assistance, the States are to receive about 
$800 million more over the five years than they would have if the old formula

                                    4.





and arrangements had continued unaltered.



           The Loan Council, as you know, approves the works and housing

programmes each year for the States. The last Council meeting in Canberra
                                       
set the level of these programmes at $823 million - a $6.5 million rise on the

previous year. The Commonwealth has now decided to provide an interest—free 

grant of $200 million for the current year, increasing in proportion

with the works and housing programmes in future years. It is, I repeat,
                                                         
a grant — not a loan. This relieves the  States of debt charges they would

otherwise have to pay, thus freeing State funds for other purposes . These

Loan Council—approved funds go to build schools, hospitals,  water and

sewerage services, and the like. The primary purpose of the grant 

portion will be to relieve the burden of debt charges on non—revenue

capital expenditure such as on school construction, police buildings, etc. 

This financial year, Victoria's share of the works and housing programme

is over $209 million.

