<!--start metadata-->
Title: Women in the workforce, childcare, National Urban and Regional Development Authority
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 15/10/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    3HA Sunday, 15 October, 1972 
                    3YB Thursday, 19 October 1972
    BROADCAST       3LK Wednesday, 18 October 1972




         One of the significant changes in our society in the 
    last few years has been the growth in the number of working 
    wives and mothers. Since 1961, the proportion of married women 
    in the labour force has increased from 17 to over 35 per cent. 
    These include mothers with young families. It is known that at 
    the present time over 25 per cent of mothers with children 
    under the age of six are in the labour force.

         Some of these mothers are engaged in paid employment 
~   in their own homes and care for their children at the same time. 
    But there are over 150,000 pre-school aged children whose
    mothers (or single fathers) work outside their homes.

         Last week, my colleague, the Minister for Labour and 
    National Service, Phillip Lynch, introduced legislation to ensure 
    the development of child day care facilities of good quality 
    throughout Australia. We are particularly concerned about the 
    situation where young children are left in the care of untrained 
    and unsupervised child minders who do not have the facilities 
    conducive to the social and emotional development of young 
    children.


         In summary, the bill provides for assistance to non- 
    profit organisations, including local government bodies, to 
    establish and operate centres which provide day care for 
    children of working and sick parents and which give priority 
    to admission to children in special need.

         It is hoped to establish some 50 new centres catering 
    for about 3000 child care places in the first full year of 
    the scheme. This would provide an increase of about 20 per cent 
    in the number of child care places available in Australia.

         A total of $4.8 million has been provided in the budget 
    for the scheme. During the scheme's first full year, the grants
    should total $6.5 million, and over the first full three years,


                           .../2

                    - 2



     it is expected that at least $23 million will be spent.

           There are one or two points about the scheme which 
     I think are of particular interest.

           The grants for the running costs of the centres demand 
     that qualified staff should be employed in the centres, including 
     staff capable of providing pre-school education.

           Thus, the centres will be much more than child minding
     depots.

•          For the last five years, the Commonwealth has been 
     providing unmatched capital grants for the building of pre- 
     school teachers' colleges, and has thereby more than doubled 
     the nation's capacity to train such teachers. Now we are about 
     to change our support so that we will be contributing to the 
     capital and the running costs of pre-school teachers' colleges.

           Thus, simultaneously the supply of trained pre-school 
     teachers is being increased and opportunities are being 
     created for their employment.

           Finally, the recurrent grants will enable the child 
•    care centres to offer reduced fees for children from low income 
     families and those in financial need.

           Attendance at the centres will not be free except
     for the most needy cases, and the fees normally charged to
     parents of children not in financial need will be about the
     same as those now being charged in the community. Of course,
     the quality of care will be superior to that otherwise available.

           The result of this policy will be that reduced fees 
     will be charged to parents in financial need, varying with 
     their circumstances.



                                   .../3

             3


     Consistent with the Commonwealth's general approach, 
the money will be directed mainly towards those who need help 
the most.
     Last week, the Prime Minister introduced into Federal 
Parliament legislation to establish a National Urban and 
Regional Development Authority.
     When the government's decision to take this step was 
announced last month, it naturally attracted a good deal of 
attention, but the concept is so vast and far-reaching, I 
wonder whether we have stressed its importance sufficiently.
     In introducing the legislation, the Prime Minister 
remarked that a properly conceived and well managed programme 
of urban and regional development could mark a turning point 
in the social and economic life of the country.
     The Country Party Leader, Mr. Anthony, has also
accorded the initiative great significance. The programme would 
be a continuing one, he said in Griffith recently, extending 
into the next century.
     Briefly, the authority, to be headed by Sir John Overall 
of the National Capital Development Commission, will advise 
on the grant of financial assistance to the States for
regional development projects, on the selection of the centres, 
and on how the centres can be rapidly developed.
     The programme will be guided from the highest level - 
by a Ministerial Council, comprising the Prime Minister and the 
Premiers.
     The Commonwealth's objective is twofold - to develop 
regional growth centres and to promote sub-metropolitan centres 
around existing cities. In co-operation with the States and 
local authorities, this will amount to by far the most
extensive programme of decentralisation Australia has seen.

