<!--start metadata-->
Title: National Service training
Description: press statement
Date: 15/11/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT :

r~ÌALCOZM FRASER :


                                                    November gth,1964


                      NATIONAL SERVICE TRAINING


              Last week the Prime Minister introduced a defence statement 
which contained many important announcements for the three Services. 
 One that is most important concerns National Service Training.

              This first report will deal with this problem, but let me 
say at the outset that what a country can do in relation to defence depends 
on four things. The first of these concerns the essential quality of the 
people which in Australia is without equal; the second. concerns the arms 
and the forces readily available; the third concerns our industrial 
capacity and the fourth concerns the nature of our friends and alliances. 
A balance must be kept between. all of these.

              For example, if you put too many people under arms and 
reduce your industrial capacity you will not be able to maintain your men
in the fields.   If your readily available arms are too small, you will
have yourself in a vulnerable position.  In this modern world I don't 
think any free country, even including America, is by itself free from 
attack and free from danger. Thus, it is essential to have alliances with
other countries who believe in the same things as we do, In this respect 
it is most important that any possible hardship or sacrifice that is present 
in one country under possible threat should be, in some measure, comparable 
to the sacrifice of those countries which are expected to come to its aid. 
Any conclusions about the extent of our arms and the degree of sacrifice 
that must be required or asked of the Australian people must, of course, be 
judged against the threat which confronts Australia; and I have said
repeatedly in recent months that I believe this threat to be severe, and one 
which will demand a greater defence effort from Australia.

              The program recently announced by the Prime Minister represents 
in many senses the culmination of a defence expansion begun in May, 1963. 
Since this time, defence expenditure has increased from a little over £200M. 
to about £300M. The new decisions just announced will increase the expenditure
to well over £400M. a year.  If additional.decisions have to be made in the 
future the figure will be greater still.

              Let me now come to the problem of manpower. The Navy and the 
Air Force believe that manpower requirements can be filled by voluntary means, 
and this is especially important for these two Services because a very high 
proportion of their people must be highly and technically trained, and in 
many cases it takes two years for this training to be completed. Thus it 
would appear that a two-year system of National Service Training would add 
little to the effective capability of these two arms of the Forces. However, 
the position of the Army is different. Larger numbers of men are needed, 
and although there are many instances in which specialised and technical 
training is required the Army estimates that many people essential for the 
purposes of the Army can be properly trained in six months.

              The increased pay and improved conditions of service announced 
in June this year were generous and it was hoped that these would attract a 
larger number of volunteers to the armed forces. They have failed to do so, 
and the Government has come to the conclusion, therefore, that it is not 
possible to attract to the Army a sufficient number of volunteers to supply 
the numbers the Government believes essential for Australia's defence. This 
is especially so since the effective target for the Army has been increased 
from 28,000 by 1967 to 33,000 by 1966.

                                                                   r2

                                - 2


            If there are any people who doubt this conclusion they should 
have a close look at the new rates of pay and the changed conditions of service 
 and judge their generosity for themselves. They should also remember that we 
are in a position of extremely full employment, and Army recruitment has always
been slow in these circumstances.  The last comprehensive alterations to the 
pay code for the armed forces occurred some years ago and was known as the
Allison Report.   This report led to an immediate effective improvement in 
recruiting, but the June statement has made no marked difference. This would 
lead one to the conclusion that further improvements in pay and conditions are 
unlikely to have much effect.

            As a result, selective National Service Training will be introduced 
next June or July. The first call-up will involve a little over 4,000, 
subsequent call-ups will involve just under 7,000. National Servicemen will 
be called up for two years, with three years on the Reserve.

            If anyone is particularly interested, I have full details of the 
proposed scheme; but let me say this at this time. In under two years the 
strength of the Army will be increased from the present 22,000 to 37,000. 
In addition, by 1968 there will be 18,000 ex-National Servicemen on the Reserve. 
Thereafter, this figure will stand at 21.000. These reserves would be avail- 
able for service overseas in time of defence emergency, as would the Citizen
Military Forces - which itself will be expanded to 35,000. Indeed, the
system of National Service Training is designed to provide a stimulus for C.M.F.
recruitment.  If a person wishes to volunteer for six years efficient service 
in the C.M.F. his obligation to serve for two years in the A.R.A. will be 
indefinitely deferred.

           Every young man will have to register before reaching the age of 
twenty, but as has already been indicated, only about 7,000 of roughly 100,000 
in the age group will be required. There will be no general deferments by 
occupation but apprentices, students and married people will have their call.-
up deferred. There are important reasons for this.   If an apprentice or a 
student is balloted in for National Service it would, I think, be unreasonable
to interrupt his training.  In any case, on completion of his training he 
could well be of much more use to the Army. The people in each age group 
who will be chosen will be selected by ballot.

           There is another most important matter. The law is going to be 
strengthened to maintain the re-employment rights of young people who do serve 
and, at the same time, the Commonwealth is considering the appropriate 
rehabilitation and re-establishment of National Servicemen after their two
years service.   One principle must be maintained. It is that no National 
serviceman will be penalised as a result of his service. Members of the 
Commonwealth Parliament have an individual and collective responsibility to 
see that this is so and I willingly accent my responsibility in this matter. 
This general problem is currently under review by the Government.

           The regular soldier or the National serviceman who serves in 
special areas of combat may, of course, qualify for benefits under specified 
conditions of repatriation or war service homes.

           There is only one other thing which I would like to mention in 
this report, and I hope this embodies the general spirit of Australia.
During the week the "Herald newspaper interviewed several young men and put 
their photographs on the front page. These people would be the age eligible 
for call-up, and according to the "Herald" everyone interviewed said that 
they were willing to serve their country. If this is an example of the 
general attitude of people of this age, we can have great courage and faith in 
the future.


                                  o0o

