<!--start metadata-->
Title: Army
Description: press statement
Date: 7/11/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                           ~




PRESS STATEI:ENT :

MALCOLM FRASER :


                                                    Eovember 7th,1965



            In recent times there have been suggestions that the Army 
should have a standing force of up to five divisions, fully equipped
and fully trained.   People who make this suggestion do so because 
they are concerned about Australia's security and because if we were 
under more direct threat than we now are they do not want to see the 
period of difficulty and shortcoming that was prevalent in the early 
days of the last war.

            I was too young at that time to understand the details of 
what was happening, but I recently read Gavin Long's book "To Benghazi", 
which is part of the official war history, and it appeared to me from
reading this that there were certain particular shortcomings. In the 
first place, there was no standing army, well trained and instantly r
available, that could be used.   After a vigorous recruiting campaign
there was a very large militia force, but the organization of this force 
was handicapped by the lack of trained officers and W.C.O's, and by lack
of equipment.    It was, in a sense, fortunate that time made it possible 
for Australian troops to be trained for a considerable period after the 
outbreak of war before our forces had to be committed to battle.

            There was one other matter which handicapped the organization
of Australian forces at that time.  Many people who first joined the 
militia joined for service in Australia or in Australian territories. 
When it was decided to send a military force to the Middle East it was
necessary for people to volunteer again for service overseas. Many 
did so volunteer, but some did not, and this meant that many units had 
to be broken up because not all members of all units volunteered for the 
expeditionary force.

            Let me look at the present situation.  We have a standing
army which will shortly be brought to a level of 40,000 men.  It is a
well trained army, it is well equipped.   By 1969 or 1970, when the 
national servicemen have gone on to the reserve there will be, in addition
to this Army, a reserve of about 22,000 men.    In addition, we have the
Citizen Military Force.   These are all parts of one Army and it is 
necessary to understand the role of each part to understand the strength 
of our present army structure.

            One thing needs saying at the outset.   I don't ever again
foresee the circumstances in which we would send an expeditionary force
half-way around the world.    If our troops are engaged in battle, as 
unfortunately they now are in certain areas, it will be because the 
struggle is closely linked with our security and with the security of 
other countries who wish to remain free in our part of the world.
Basically that means south-east Asia.     Thus the role for the Regular 
Arrpy is to make whatever contribution that is required of Australia to the 
mutual defence of the region.

            Beyond this, the purpose of the Australian Regular Army is 
to provide a shield to protect Australia in a period of more acute defence
emergency, pending mobilization of the C.M.F. and the regular Army reserves
or pending general mobilization in a situation of general war.  Before 
getting to a period of general mobilization there is an intermediate step
which was established by legislation last year.  That is a situation of
defence emergency.   If such a declaration is made the C.M.F. or the 
Regular Army Reserves can be called up for full-time duty throughout the
period of emergency.    Under these circumstances the Regular Army's task 
would be to provide the shield for the protection of Australia until these
other forces can be mobilised.    However, if it was clear that we were 
faced with an even more serious threat and if general mobilization were



                                                                    /2

                                    2



 were to become essential to our security, there would then be general 
 mobilization and the C.M.F. would not only be called up but would be 
 required to undertake a very great part of the training of many people
 who would be called to the services under these circumstances. If this 
 is the role of the C.M.F., as I believe it to be, then it is clear that 
 a ready availability of highly trained officers and N.C.O's is more 
 important than the mere question of numbers because, as Long pointed out 
 in his description of the events leading to the last war, it was the 
 shortage of Officers and N.C.O's and of general administrative machinery 
 and equipment that led to the most severe delays.

               There is no excuse of course for a shortage of equipment, 
 and the Government has taken steps to see that the Army is being provided
with the best modern equipment available.   It is doing a great deal to 
 see that adequate Officer and N.C.O. training is available for C.M.F. 
 personnell so that if the situation does arise they will be equipped to 
 serve in the rapia mobilization of Australian forces.

               There are two great differences between the present
 situation to that prevailing before the last war. We now have a standing 
Army, perhaps not as large as some would wish, but still a good and
 effective Army.  In the years before the last war there was virtually no 
 standing Army and the equipment now available to our Armed forces is
 infinitely superior to what it was ih 1938-39.  Our own industrial 
 capacity to produce equipment of many kinds is also very much improved. 
 I have no hesitation in saying that our Army is in a better position than 
it ever has been, except in times of full mobilization during the first 
war or in the second war.

               The suggestion that we should have five standing divisions, 
formed through the C.M.F. by the use of national servicemen in the C.Fi.F. 
doesn't take into account these changed circumstances in the pre-war
situation.   It doesn't take into account that it would not be practicable 
to put national servicemen in the C.M.F. under present circumstances for 
many different reasons, and it ignores the fact that we now have a standing 
Army, a shield to protect Australia pending partial or pending full 
mobilization.

               If a criticism were to be made of our present armed forces 
the one I would make would be that the shield, the regular army itself, 
should be larger than the 40,000 which is the present announced target
of the Government.    I would prefer the standing army to be of 54,000, 
but there is a limit to the speed with which the Army itself can expand. 
If too many national servicemen are called up there will not be enough 
Officers and N.C.O.'s to train them, or if too many national servicemen 
are trained compared to the size of the army there may not be enough
regular units to which the trained servicemen can be posted. Thus 
there needs to be a balance between the numbers of national servicemen 
available, officers and N.C.O's and the number, size and type of units 
which are in the regular army to which the national servicemen can be 
posted after training.

               I hope that the necessary balance between these two factors 
will work out in such a way that the army would be able to grow fairly
rapidly from the present size to a total of about 50,000 to 54,000. If 
there is to be an expansion beyond the present plans I think this is where
it should be.    Apart from this the role of the C.M.F. in the army must 
be emphasised, and while it should seek to attract volunteers at all levels 
particular attention must be given, as I believe it is being, to the 
adequate training of N.C.O's and Officers in the C.M.F.




                                  o0o

