<!--start metadata-->
Title: Emergency Assistance for woolgrowers, inflation
Description: Radio talk
Date: 28/03/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                     Sunday, March 28 - 3HA 
        RADIO TALK                                Thursday, April 1 - 3YB


             This week I would like to talk with you about events in Canberra, 
        to say thank you...about emergency assistance for woolgrowers and the 
        psychology of inflation.


        THANK YOU

                 I would like to sincerely thank the hundreds of well wishers
        who sent me telegrams or letters of support over the past few days.
                 In what was a period of great personal stress, the letters and
~......~telegrams were a comfort for Mrs. Fraser and myself.
                 The recent days have not been easy and the many messages of
        support have been greatly appreciated in such a difficult period.
                 I do not wish to comment further on the events that took place
        in Canberra which have now passed into the pages of history.
                 However, if there is anyone of you listening who wish to pursue
        the reasons for my recent actions in Canberra I will certainly make
        available a copy of the recent Hansard.
                 I believe that the past is past. We must now look forward with
        renewed vigour and confidence to the future.
   •             I also believe that the full co-operation of all members of the
        party, in and out of Parliament, will bring success in the 1972 General
        Election.
                 There will be a lot of hard work to be done over the period of the
      next 20 months be everyone in the Government.
                 I can assure all of you that I will be working for Wannon in
      particular and for Australia as I have in the past.
                 As a private Member of Parliament I will be maintaining my
        interest in Defence policies        .the problems of inflation which must 
        be overcome...and in particular I will be devoting time to the great 
        and acute problems of the wool industry.


                                                                          2/

                  -2-

    WOOLGROWERS ASSISTANCE
        Woolgrowers who are listening to this programme should be 
    aware that applications received after March 31 under the scheme 
    for emergency assistance, because of the decline in wool incomes 
    between 1968-69 and 1969-70, will not be accepted.
        The original closing date for the receipt of applications 
    was November 30, last year. This was extended to January 8 by the
110 then Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Doug Anthony.
        The extension was granted to ensure that all woolgrowers 
    who were eligible for assistance, but who might not be aware of 
    the details of the scheme, would have had time to lodge their 
    applications.
        A reasonable time was given after January 8, to allow for 
    unavoidable delays in communications between applicants in remote 
    areas and accountants in Capital cities.
        According to my colleague, Mr. Ian Sinclair, who is the
 .  present Minister for Primary Industry, a few applications are still
    arriving and, where there is a valid reason for their lateness, they 
    have been accepted.
        Mr. Sinclair has also advised me that as it is now more 
    than two months since the extended closing date for acceptance, no 
    applications from woolgrowers that are received after March 31 will 
    be considered for the payment of financial grants.


    INFLATIONARY PSYCHOLOGY
        There is a need for a new pattern of behaviour in the
    Australian community's approach to wages, prices and. investment 
                                    3/ 

               -3-

     I believe we must work to bring about a change in the national
  psychology of inflation.
     This change is necessary if we are to break out of the inflationary
  complex in which rapid wage and price rises are becoming built into
  community expectations.
     An inflationary psychology in the community tends to compel
  people to offset the effects of inflation by seeking higher and higher
  wages and prices to protect themselves.
     In this way, inflation feeds on itself.
     The Government is determined to give a lead to the community
  ina trying to change this type of thinking.
     I suggest that as a nation, we just cannot allow this pxsychology
  to continue.
     Over the last six years the index of prices received by farmers
  has fallen by 7.3 per cent, while the index of prices they paid has
  risen by 19.8 per cent.
     This is an intolerable burden for many farmers, and the current
  rate of inflation is aggravating the problem and placing many more
• farmers in an intolerable position.
     Country communities are suffering and net rural income is
  declining.
     Businessmen, storekeepers and local Government authorities are
  unable to pass on any more of these increased costs to their
  communities.
     This is affecting development and employment, and is aggravating
  the already disturbing drift of population out of rural areas.
     I am not attacking the responsible unionist or btsinessman, but
  it must be understood by the whole community that it is not the number
  of dollars in the pay packet that counts, but what each of these dollars
  will buy.

r
                                                            - 4-
                      Increases in the pay packet are a cruel illusion when the 
           buying power of each of these dollars is eroded by inflation.
                      There is a real need for wage and salary demands to be geared 
           to real increases in productivity.
                      The Government has taken a lead by measures to reduce the 
           demand pressures in the economy.
                      Complementary action is needed, and this action must be taken 
           by the Australian people as a community.
                      Responsible restraint by unions and industry is needed.
                      Price control as a means of controlling inflation has been 
         discredited by the experience of those countries which have tried it.
                      Surely it is far better to approach the prpblem of inflation 
           with an informed and responsible community itself, finding solutions 
           rather than bringing in bureaucratic controls.

                                                         000.0000...

