<!--start metadata-->
Title: Beef industry
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 12/10/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   Leader of the Opposition


   E MEMBER FOR WANNON, MR MALCOLM FRASER

                                 SUNDAY OCTOBER 12, 1975 

                                 THURSDAY OCTOBER 16, 1975

              ELECTORAL TALK




   It is to be hoped the Prime Minister and the government will 
   not treat the I.A.C. Report on the Beef Industry with the 
   same cynical contempt they showed to other I.A.C. Reports on 
   sections of rural industry.

   The Industries Assistance Commission was set up with great 
   fanfare to replace the Tarriff Board.

   Early in the life of the Labor Government the Prime Minister 
   made much of the decision to extend the scope of its activities 
   to primary industry.

   However, in practice, on matters connected with the rural 
   industry, Mr Whitlam has used the I.A.C. as a device to delay 
   action, while giving an appearance of activity.

   One major decision was taken without reference to the I.A.C. - the 
   decision to remove the superphosphate bounty.

   This was a particular blow to small farmers who were the major 
   users of superphosphate. They are the ones who have to make 
   the most of their land by improving its fertility.

•  When the I.A.C. did produce a report recommending restoration of 
   the bounty, by a majority of 2 to 1 of the commissioners
   concerned, Mr Whitlam used the haven of Parliament to describe 
   the majority recommendations as pathetic.

   The I.A.C. also reported favourably on references made to it 
   for stabilisation of rural incomes and assistance for the 
   eradication of bovine TB and brucellosis. Both these reports 
   also appear to have been shelved.

   It is no wonder that farmers are asking whether the government 
   will ever act on I.A.C. recommendations for help for primary industry.

   The I.A.C. proposals announced this week for aid to the beef 
   producers have been advocated by the Opposition for a year.

   They are quite satisfactory.

   They would help sustain many producers during the coming two years,
   a period during which the governments advisers expect beef prices 
   on world markets to remain low..
   Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600/2

                            -2-


The I.A.C. has recommended that credit be extended to beef
cattle producers so that rates of interest average not less than 
4% over all loans, with provision for up to two years carry 
on finance and better terms for producers in the pastoral zones 
and on pastoral leases.


The I.A.C. also called for household support for one year for 
producers whose farms cannot give them a living.


Both the state governments and the Australian government 
would contribute to costs.


These are actions we would take now, if we were in office.


But will this government act, or will it disregard the report 
as it disregarded the recommendation to restore the superphosphate 
bounty.


The world cattle prices are especially serious for Australian •
producers, since Australia is the worlds largest meat exporter 
with half Australia's production going to export.


The Commission's short term measures are designed to assist the 
industry through its present difficulties, so that producers who 
can operate profitably in the longer term are encouraged to 
remain in the industry.


The need for aid of this sort has been obvious for a long time.


By referring the problem to the I.A.C. the government put off 
action for a year.


No;Ÿ. that the I.A.C. has reported it no longer has any pretext 
lest.


                         000000000


                                                             •

