<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool promotion
Description: press statement
Date: 11/10/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  4




         PRESS STATEMENT BY MALCOLM FRASER, 
            MEMBER FOR WANnON.

       Last week, the Government announced its intentions in 
   relation to wool promotion. Any levy additional to the present 
   10/- that the woolgrowers may decide to put towards promotion will 
   be matched pound for pound by the Commonwealth Government. This 
   could involve the Commonwealth in the expenditure of £4M. to £5M. 
   a year depending on the woolgrowers! own decisions in this matter.
       This is an example of what the industry can achieve when 
   it is a united organisation and makes a unified approach to the 
   Government. It is only a very few weeks since representatives of 
   the Australian Wool Industry Conference put their case to the Prime 
   Minister on this matter of wool promotion and now the Government 
   has made its decision.
    Speaking to the proposal, the Minister for Primary Industry, 
   Mr. Adermann said that the proposals accepted by the Government 
   were precisely the same as the proposals put to the Government by 
   the industry's representatives. In other words, the industry got 
   what it was asking for. Mr. Adermann went on to say that other 
   matters that may be put to the Government by the Conference would 
   be given the same sort of earnest and favourable consideration. 
   He was obviously making a reference to marketing in saying this. 
   He said that a marketing scheme was desirable but that he knew of 
   five separate marketing proposals that had been put to him. The 
   Marketing Committee was now examining these to see which was best 
   and when its recommendation was made it would be put to a ballot 
   of growers for decision.
       If the industry had not had the forum of the Australian 
   Wool Industry Conference on which representatives from the different 
   organisations can meet together, it may well not have achieved this 
   response from the Government in the very short time that it has. 
   It would probably have taken the industry much longer to formulate 
   its own proposals in the first instance. This is a positive example 
   of the value of the Conference to the industry.
       Of course, the actual cost of this proposal to the Government 
   will depend upon the decisions that may be made by the industry 
   organisations and their representatives on the Australian Wool 
   Industry Conference but at least the Government has shown what it is 
   prepared to do and this makes a firm basis on which the industry 
   can make its own decisions.
       I have heard someone saying that the Government should have
   made some policy in this matter a considerable time ago. This 
   depends on whether you believe that the Government should make 
   policy and tell the industry what is good for it or whether you 
   believe that the industry should be encouraged to make its own

            -2-

policy on matters that particularly affect it and then seek the 
appropriate Government co-operation. It is the Government's view, 
and one which I support, that the industry should be encouraged 
in every way it can to make its own decisions on matters that 
affect its members and its future. That is why the Government 
would not have made policy on this matter of promotion before 
receiving submissions from the industry.
   Woolgrowers should take note of this decision not so much 
as to what it means in relation to promotion but as an example of 
what the Conference can achieve for the industry.
   If a unified approach is put through the Conference to the 
Government the industry will learn that it has a power and an 
influence that it has lacked since its inception. The wool 
industry being what it is, I am quite certain it will use this 
power and influence in a responsible fashion.



CANBERRA, A.C.T.
 11th October, 1963.

