<!--start metadata-->
Title: Departmental changes announced in the Governor General's speech
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 15/03/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT BŸ THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.


DEPARTMENTAL CHANGES ANNOUNCED IN THE GOVERNOR GENERAL'S SPEECH

    I would like to mention the Governor General's speech which
he made at the opening of this session of the Parliament and in which
there were a number of important announcements. These affected
several Departments and covered a number of future activities. I
will itemise them quite briefly.
    The Department of Territories that was previously responsible
for Papua—New Guinea and the Northern Territory is going to be renamed
the Department of External Territories and will no longer be respons-
ible for the Northern Territory. This is an indication that the
Government recognises that the destinies of the Northern Territory are
different from those of Papua—New Guinea. The Northern Territory's
destiny is to develop ultimately as a State of Australia. The
destiny of Papua New Guinea is to become a self—governing country,
developed for independence if ard when it is clearly demonstrated
by the majority of the indigenous population that this is what they
want. This has been the basic objective of Government policy for
some time in relation to Papua New Guinea but it has not previously
been spelt out in clear terms.
    Through, Mr Wentworth, Minister for Social Services and Minister
in charge of Aboriginal Affairs, the policies of the Commonwealth, of
the State Departments and instrumentalities for the welfare and advance-
ment of aboriginal citizens of Australia will be co—ordinated. An
objective will be to establish circumstances in which aboriginal
citizens will be able to choose their own representatives to consult
with and advise the Council and Office of Aboriginal Affairs.
    It is particularly pleasing to see that Mr Wentworth will
have responsibility for these matters because he has shown a very
long standing concern for the problems of aborigines. He will now
have an opportunity to see that some real advance is made.



15 March, 1968

