<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool marketing
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 25/06/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    3HA Sunday, 25 June, 1972. 
   BROADCAST:       3YB Thursday, 29 June, 1972. 

                    3LK Tuesday, 27 June, 1972.




      Last Tuesday the entire Australian wool industry had 

   a major victory in its progress towards wool marketing reform. 
   By now most of you will be aware of the details of the 

   Government's decision. We agreed on the creation of a single 

   wool marketing authority to be known as the Australian Wool 

   Marketing Corporation. We also gave broad guidelines with 

   which the new Corporation should conform when it makes any 

   submission to the Government relating to acquisition of the 

   wool clip.


      The Prime Minister has detailed these, but basically 
   they boil down to a condition that the Corporation operate 

   acquisition on a commercial basis. Let there be no mistake. 

   These decisions open the way for positive and practical steps 

   "towards the reform of the wool industry marketing arrangements; 

   reforms which, as you all know, I have been advocating for

•  at least a decade.

      I now want to make a few specific points about the 

   decision and the way it was reached.

      First, the Government has made it plain it expects 

   the question of direct subsidy or price support for the 

   industry to be dealt with as a separate issue,d_istinct from 

   marketing reform and acquisition. These issues are quite 

   separate. In the last year we subsidised the price of wool 

   through the auction system supported by the Australian Wool

   Commission. The deficiency payments scheme will continue at 
      the level
   36c a lb.,/ recommended by the Minister for Primary Industry,

   Mr. Sinclair.
                          .../2

                  2.

      The question of additional financial support under the 
    present or alternative marketing situations will be dealt with 
    separately from the method of marketing.
      Second, the new Corporation will be expected to make 
    recommendations to the Government from time to time on the 
    changes it considers necessary to control the marketing of 
    the whole clip. Because State legislation is required in
•   addition to Commonwealth legislation and because financial 
    arrangements would need to be determined, specific proposals 
    for acquisition would need the approval of/governments for 
    their implementation. All this was agreed to. I have no 
    doubt that Mr. Sinclair will seek to bring the necessary 
    legislation for the new Corporation before the Federal Parliament 
    at the first opportunity.
      Once it has been established, I am sure that the Corporation 
    will be looking to the methods and techniques of selling wool. 
    I feel quite certain that the Corporation will be putting proposals 
    to the Government on acquisition. Indeed, from the terms of 
    the Prime Minister's statement on Tuesday night, one would
    expect the Corporation to turn its attention to acquisition soon 
    after its establishment.
      One of the significant factors in the Prime Minister's 
    statement is that the Corporation will have a completely free 
    hand in relation to recommendations concerning acquisition. 
    The Government has not sought to shackle the Corporation by 
    saying it must be done this way or it must be done that way. 
    The Corporation will be established to manage and guide the
    affairs of this great industry.

                                    3.

            We are living in a dynamic and changing market situation. 
       It would therefore have been wrong to place restrictions on the 
       way in which the Corporation might make its recommendations or
       on what it might recommend. The one limitation is that it needs 
       to operate on a commercial basis. This establishes a framework 
       in which the Corporation will be able to build on the experience 
       of the Wool Commission and Wool Board, and develop its own 
       expertise and marketing techniques which can be changed to meet 
       the circumstances as they arise.
•           The third point I must emphasise is this. The Deputy 
       Prime Minister, Mr. Anthony, made it quite plain a fortnight 
       ago in Western Australia that there was a great deal of work 
       that had to be done before the actual introduction of an 
       acquisition scheme. Let me quote what he said.
            He said".... there must be extensive negotiations with the 
       industry and with the State Governments.
            "For the Labor Party to talk of passing legislation this 
       month is nonsense. It is significant that New Zealand which 
       has just decided to introduce an acquisition scheme, expects 
       that it will take 12 months to bring it into operation. That 
       is in a country which has no State Governments to deal with.
            "In our case we will have to develop detailed proposals, 
       get agreements to these between the Commonwealth, the industry 
       and all State Governments and then have legislation passed by 
       the Commonwealth and all State Parlizments. I caution the 
       wool growers against using the word 'acquisition' too loosely. 
       I for one, am not prepared to rush into just any acquisition
       scheme. We must take each step as carefully as we can,

                       4.

and make every move a winner for the wool grower." That is 
the end of the quote from Mr. Anthony.
     Finally a word about the way the Government's decision 
was reached. In some parts of the press the discussions have 
been seen as a clearly defined Liberal versus Country Party 
argument. This has not been the case. There is no Party 
division on this issue.

                                          There
was agreement that the Corporation should have the responsibility 
for making recommendations for marketing reform, including 
acquisition. There was complete agreement that the Corporation
should operate acquisition on a commercial basis. ~y
    The financial conditions set out by the Prime Minister 
in his statement as guidelines for any acquisition proposal 
were accepted with full agreement. The recommendations of 
Mr. Sinclair on the continuation of the deficiency payments 
arrangements were also accepted.
    I believe the Government's decision was a responsible one. 
It represents a major step towards the implementation of a 
sensible, streamlined marketing system now urgently needed for 
the Australian wool industry.
    In plain words, the recent decisions of the Government 
have removed the obstacles which for so long have stood in the 
way of sound wool marketing reform. The Government's decision 
is in effect a decision in principle for an acquisition scheme 
provided it comes within proper and sensible guidelines.

