<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 8/06/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL TALK

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION, MR. MALCOLM FRASER
                       4#2`t".4.
The Situation Today
The Whitlam Labor Government is battling to survive. Some 
22 years after it was formed with such fanfare, thePrime 
Minister finds himself struggling to carry out a reshuffle.

An inquiry has been ordered into an incident involving 
Treasury officials.

A man who was Deputy Leader of the Labor Party for seven years 
and Deputy Prime Minister for 18 months has resigned from 
Parliament. Another Minister, Mr. Clyde Cameron, has put the 
Prime Minister through a dance, refusing to be sacked. Half 
the unwieldy Cabinet of 27 has been changed. Departments,-_: 
ministerial offices, are in turmoil.
We are to have our third Treasurer in seven months.
Unemployment remains severe, but the Prime Minister is sacking 
a man who, in the light of the aiicepts of the Labor Party, has 
done a good jon.

The Defence Departments have been reOorganised. The Armed 
Services have been run down to a level which has demoralised 
all ranks.

Yet the Minister for Defence is walking out, apparently, to 
become an Ambassador in Scandinavia.

Apart from Mr. Riordan of New South Wales, there is no new 
blood in the Ministry.

The changes are superficial, a progressive barn dance, in which 
ministers and portfolios change partners while going round in 
circles.                   ..2

•                                            2.
  WHERE DOES THE RESPONSIBILITY LIE?
  The Prime Minister began his troubled tenure of office by 
  blaming the former government when anything went wrong.

  Over the past two and a half years he has continued in this vein.
  While Australia has been plagued with its worse ever inflation 
  and unemployment, a vicious credit squeeze and with unnerving 
  switches in economic policies, the Prime Minister has never 
  ceased in his search for scapegoats.

  He blamed overseas countries for Australia's inflation.
  He blamed the Treasury for not keeping up to date statistics 
  and for the advice it gave him.

  Then he blamed his first Treasurer, Frank Crean, and sacked 
  him.
  He blamed excessive wage demands for inflation, without 
  mentioning the real cause which is excessive Government spending.

  He blamed the State Government for lack of co-operation, 
  although by co-operation he really meant unwillingness to 
  accept central direction andoontrol.

  Some months ago he said Dr. Cairns was the best man for the 
  Treasurr's job. Now he is sacking him. His Minister for
  Labour also '              sacked.

  All these changes cannot hide the fact that the Prime Minister 
  as Head of the Government must carry responsibility for the 
  success or failures of the Government.

  He primarily is responsible for the economic failures.
  He affirmed only last week that he supported the economic 
  decisions which the Government has taken.

  Since they have had such unhappy results, he must take the major 
  part of the blame for these results.
  He cannot avoid responsibility by sacking Treasurers.

