<!--start metadata-->
Title: Unemployment
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 5/10/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   Leader of the Opposition


   AND MEMBER FOR WANNON, MR MALCOLM FRASER


                      SUNDAY OCTOBER 5, 1975

   FOR PRESS          THURSDAY, OCTOBER 9, 1975





             ELECTORAL TALK


   There are now more people looking for work in Australia than 
   at any time since the great depression of the nineteen thirties.

   However the statistics don't tell the full story. There just 
•  isn't the part time work around that there used to be, or 
   the overtime.

   In another six weeks 230,000 school leavers will arrive in the 
   job market. The way things are going there won't be enough 
   jobs for these young people. In January we will have over 
   400,000 people looking for work.

   This shortage of jobs has come about because a lot of
   businesses large and small, but especially small, can't afford 
   to pay excessive taxes and the very high wages and salaries 
   which some people have got in the last year.

   The profits which firms now show are illusory, because of inflation.

   If industry were allowed the true cost of replacing worn out 
   assets instead of the present taxation allowance, then the private 
   sector would be seen to have lost $480 million dollars last year.
•  It has been overlooked that in Australia today profits mostly 
   don't go to the rich. Profits go to the millions of people 
   with insurance policies and membership in superannuation funds.

   Above all profits go to create jobs. Without adequate profits 
   there is no work.

   Taxes are high because the government needs high taxes to 
   finance many of its extravagant programmes and high taxes 
   take away the money to create new productive jobs.

   Last year the result of excessive taxes and rising wages
   was to wipe out the capacity of business to create additional 
   jobs.

   Already this year some 3000 businesses have closed down - 
   an average of 60 businesses each week.


   Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600

          -2-
Most of these business failures are small businesses. 
When they fold up their disappearance doesn't get 
reported. They employ less than a hundred people and 
it is these people who notice it first when their employer 
goes bankrupt because he can no longer afford the wage 
costs or the taxes.

But 40 our of every 100 people in the workforce are 
employed by small business. Small businesses are the 
heart of the private enterprise system.

When small business goes to the wall, thousands and 
thousands of jobs go down the drain. And that is what 
is happening.

What is needed is a full scale programme to revive employment
opportunities by lightening the tax burden and giving 
businesses real incentives to invest.

Before the last budget an expert committee, appointed by 
the government, the Mathews Committee, warned that present 
methods of taxing firms could destroy private industry. 
They were, "incompatible with the continued existence of 
the private sector."

The failure of private business would bring unemployment 
greater than anything we have experienced.

However, the government ignored this warning and the 
recommendations of the Mathews Committee.

Unemployment now is double the highest level under the 
Liberal and Country Party Government. As Parties committed 
to the individual we are pledged to maintain and expand 
job opportunities.

In our reply to the budget the Opposition proposed the most 
sweeping programme to expand job opportunities to meet 
this crisis. We propose to do this by major tax reforms 
for both individuals and companies which will give private 
enterprise the go-ahead once more.

We have pledged ourselves not merely to reform personal 
income tax, but also to bring in the most far reaching 
reforms of the company tax system ever proposed. We will 
do this to get job opportunities expanding again on the 
basis of the Mathews Committee recommendatbns.

We need a commonsense programme to get Australia moving 
again. The Opposition has suggested one.

The Australian economic system used to work once. We 
will make it work again and better.

