<!--start metadata-->
Title: Decentralisation
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 8/06/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                               BY: balcalm Fraser, Member for WarAUCE+Tk L ATTO/                                                        1_71    ~
                          Last week I wrote about national development. I tried to
show how our population has risen and how our industries have expanded. 
This WOUK I want to show, if I can, how this national development fits 
into the policy of decentralisation which all "ustrulians in their 
hearts would like to see pursued more vigorously than it now is.
                           Some people have objected that a greet part of this increasing 
  population have found employment in the cities or on the outskirts of 
  the cities in the new industrial suburbs like Broadmeadows and Dandenong, 
  near Melbourne and they object that some of these industries have not 
  been able to establish themselves in country areas. On this mutter we 
  have just got to face the facts of life. You cannot direct a company 
  where to establish itself. It wants to be near the markets, near the 
  centre of transport organisation and near a place where there is already 
   Bono reserve of accommodation for the people who will work in the
   factories.                In the last few years the have noticed with interest the
   great industrial upsurge in South Australia whose rate of development 
   proportionately has been faster than the rate of development in any 
    other L.,tate although, of course, Victoria being u much larger and 
    more powerful State, has achieved a greatez absolute rate of developmmat. 
    The interesting point is this. South 1 ustralia's industrial ezpansaio4 
    began by accident. A pertain factory wished to establish itself on the 
      outskirts of Sydney. The Government of New South Wales at that time 
      said: "tio, we are coing to pursue a policy of decentraliaaation. You 
      can go to Dubba or you can go to Nowrs. You cannot come here". Lir 
      'horns 1layford heard of this, got on the wire to the Managing -irector
      of the Company and said: "Come to S                                                                       'oastralia. You will find the 
      facilities you want." The Company went to South fuatralia and others 
      followed. That is one reason why oompanies cannot be directed where; 
      they will establish themselves. You have heard of this business about 
       the ++carbon Black factory at Alton. I don't know the rights or 
      wrongs of this particular situation but it is true that three other 
       States have made urgent representations to this Company saying:
        Tease come to us. v.e will give you thefeoilities you require without
        any bickering and argume nt . "

                                2
         This competition between the tetates to obtain factorie is 8 
goollthing for Australia It is competition withia :eistralia by one 
State to out-do another &tete and there as never any harm in that so
long as we do not allow our state pride to usurp our national '.ustralien 
pride.
         Because of trie intensive development that has taken lace 

in the outer suburbs of our cajtal cities, especially lialbourne
Adelaide and Sydney, wo who live in lete country do not always see titaXtr'le) 

strain that this places upon public authorities. ?or example, completely 
new roads and sewerage works Wive to be built; schools have to be 
established where before there were no schools and the Postmaeter-Generell 
Depaxtzent has the vital task of installing adequate communicetions amongst 
these uburbs, or building cost Officee and layine cables and connecting 

the people Alo want a telephohe.
         eometimss people in the country areas has asked oe, do I think 

that country districts are getting a fair share of the runds made avail- 
able for developoeet to the Postmaster-General's Departaent. All I can say 

in answer to that is that I know that in many of those industrial suburbs
people have to wait on un averse ouch longer for a telephone then they 
do in country areas.

        Whet I have said tonds to show that major industries are going 

to r mnin concentrated around capital cities near the neart of the 

transport organisation or this country. If that is so, you may well 

ask: "What are we in the country going to do about decentrelieetion?" 
The best answer to that is quite clearly a mor''. intensive use of the 

resources which are aveileble to the country; a more intensive two of
our land and the opening np of new areas.  We have seen a fine =amp' 

of this in the Coldier Settlement policies that have been pursued since 
the last war. I know there arc certain parts of this electorate where, 

if you take a little trouble to get on top or the highest hill, you can 
look round in every direction and ace new home after new homo and each new 

home represents a soldi r settler. I think this applies in particular 
to the Caramut-Hawkesdale areas but much soldier settlement has taken
place all over this electorate.

        In this article I have spoken about deoentralisation in eeneral 
and next week I want to explain the theme of oy last paragraph, that is, 
that the best decentralisation for the country areas in general is a 
more intensive use of the resources which are cost readily available 
to the country districts.

4/6/1958.

            DE 4T1tLIkATION IL THE I an OF O}TLAI
           By: Malcolm Fraser, Member for Weeeoe.

           rpst week I wrote about decentralisation and the difficulty 
that country areas have experienced in ettracting loree industries to 
the country. I tried to show that tate Governments cannot direct 
industries where to go end thr:t when this has happened in thepest, 
the result has been Ghat the industry has gone to another State.
           It i; perhapa unfortunate that because facilities are 
more easily obtained near the large cities, eepecially for the work 
force, industries tend to concentrate in heavily populated area. 
They also tend to do this because the markets are closer and transport
charges less. Nevertheless, just because    the facts of life tond to 
place country areas at a disadvantage over this matter of decentralisation 
it does not mean that we ere powerless to act and that we cannot expand
our own particular activities.
            Right throughout western Victoria we have seen tie €rowth 
of soldier settlement and we have seen the beginnings of future closer 
settlement policies in the scheme that was undertaken at Dorodong.
I hear from local representatives that Ur. McDonald, L.A., has 
considerable hope of further large areas being thrown open to develop-
ment.    This is u good thing, especially for western Victoria, because 
 it means that ea are making a more intensive use of our own resources
 of the land.
             Nevertheless, in this article I vent to say something about 
 decentralisation in the 1ort of kortland. The port, a good one, 
 perhaps the most modern in Australia with quick access not only to the 
 shipping routes but also to the hinterland, will very shortly be an 
 accomplished fact. The battle to get the port by certain people in 
 kortland has not been an easy one but they have been determined in 
 their strugfle. The =re dif:icult struggle remains - that of 
 building up the trade of the port to show that it is fully justified 
 and also to persuade industries to establish themselves in Portland. 
 I have said already that Governments cannot direct industries where to 
 go. If they start trying to do that, the industry will move to

                             MO

  I
another State. It is therefore very largely for Portland to be able to 
offer facilities that will make it attractive for industries to come to 
it -- such things as water and power and goo l transport facilities. I 
believe lortland will have these attractions but I dp not believe we are 
going to see any sudden transformation ove the next two or three years. 

It will be a hard battle and the people in western Victoria will delude 
themselves if they think that a second Geelong oan be establidhed in 
Portland overnight. Although Portland can only be regarded as en 
unqualified succeas when industries have finally recognised the very real 
merits of establishing in this area, it is quite true that the primary 
industries of western Victoria can do more than theyb are doing to support 
Portland and I would like to take one example, wool. I know quite well 
that moat woolgrowers like to see their clip sold and many have long 
associations with particular brokers in Melbourne or Geelong but if 
woolgrowers believe in 1-ortland, in the future of the port, some small 
personal Inconvenience is not necessarily a high price to pay to support 
that belief. If woolgrowers from this area all sent even a small portion
 of their clip tobe sold in London through Portland, then that alone would
 add tremendously to the trade through the port. Incidentally, there are
 certain advantages of selling in London because if you ere one of those
 who shear late in the ,Wstralian season, you can then sell in London
 months before it will be possible to sell in Australia, 1.13c), it is 
 not a bad thing to spread your eggs into two baskets. Sometimes the 
 Australian market is the bettor one; other times, the London market is
 better.
          Decentralisation for the country areas, then, very largely 
 means a more intensive use of existing resources in the country. For us 
 that means soldier settlement and the opening ul of Crown lands, and in 
  the case of kortland, we can help by supporting the port with ourpprimar 
  produce. It also means a struggle to convince companies that there are 
  natural advantages in establishing themselves in lortlund as opeosed 
  to Melbourne or Geelong and this struggle will be a hard one. It will nc 

  be won in a short space of time but I have every cOnfidence that the 
  future will see the success of Portland and the growth of l'ortland as

  en important industrial centre.
  11/8/1958.                    ••^•^•••••^^••••••••••••^••••••

