<!--start metadata-->
Title: Equipment of the armed forces
Description: press statement
Date: 22/11/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEITNT


NALCOLM FRASER :

                                                     November 22nd,1964


                   EQUIPMENT OF THE ARMED FORCES


            The Prime Minister recently introduced the most important
defence program ever seen in peace time in Australia. I have undertaken 
the somewhat ambitious task of condensing the essential elements of his 
one-hour statement into two of these reports, each of six or seven minutes. 
Last week I spoke about the question of National Service training, and 
this week I want to talk about the equipment of the three Services.

            The Prime Minister opened his statement by noting. the 
deterioration in our strategic situation. He drew attention to the 
increased difficulties in South East Asia, in Laos and Vietnam, and in 
particular to Indonesia's policies which could lead to war between Malaysia 
and Indonesia and this, of course, would involve Australia. He emphasised 
the tragedy of this situation because he pointed out that this was the only 
point of difference we had with Indonesia, which is a country with which, 
for geographic and other reasons, we have much in common. He made it 
plain, however, that if this one point of difference makes it necessary to 
oppose Indonesia with all the power at our command,Australia will do so.

            The Prime Minister spoke relatively briefly about the Navy and 
the R.A.A.F. whose expansion will continue to rely upon volunteers. It was 
pointed out that the present naval program involves the construction of 
ten new ships, including three of the latest guided missile destroyers, 
two type 12 anti-submarine frigates and four submarines, in addition to 
other draft designed specifically to meet our obligations in and around New 
Guinea and in assistance to Malaysia.

            The Government has always placed a special emphasis on the 
anti-submarine role, not only of the Navy but also of the Air Force. At 
the present moment two squadrons are equipped with anti-submarine aircraft. 
One of these squadrons is equipped with a slightly older type of Neptune, 
and this will have its planes replaced with Lockheed Orion aircraft which 
have an outstanding performance in the location and destruction of submarines. 
It is the best aircraft of its type available. Ten will be ordered.

            Attention was drawn to the new aircraft coming into the R.A.A.F., 
to the 100 Mirage and the 24 F111, both of which are the latest and most 
effective aircraft of their type. Special reference was made to the
support and logistic role of the Air Force, and as a result twelve new 
Hercules transports will be purchased, as an addition to the twelve we already
have,   since these' aircraft can carry about 40% more than the older type 
Hercules.

            A great deal of other equipment is going to be ordered for all 
three Services, for example, expenditure on Army equipment will be nearly 
doubled. It is not always remembered that expenditure on equipment was 
increased in the review of May,1963 from £1OM to £17.5M. During this 
current program this figure will be progressively increased to £30M in 
1967/68.

            For several years the Government has placed a great deal of 
importance on the manoeuvrability of our forces, and as a result an
extensive program of airport construction is underway in appropriate parts 
of Australia and New Guinea.


                                                                    /2

                                     2


             In May, 1963 the Government authorised the expansion of the 
Pacific Island Regiment from 700 to 1,400, and it has now further authorised 
the expansion of the Pacific Island Regiment to 3,500. The emphasis that 
has been placed on works in and around New Guinea, on the expansion of the 
Pacific Island Regiment and on the Patrol boats that will be suitable for 
use in New Guinea or Borneo waters clearly indicates that the Government is 
paying very close attention to the possibility of hostilities with Indonesia.

             It should not be thought that what the Government is now doing
represents a sudden spurt in defence.  It is rather the culmination of a
graduated program that began in May, 1963.  In that year a mprogram was 
envisaged which was to raise expenditure from £214M. in 1962/63 to £270M 
in 1966/67. Since May,1963 however, additional items of equipment have 
been ordered which involved an estimated cost of £118M. The effect of 
this can be seen in that this year we are already spending just under £300M. 
In the last two years therefore it is plain that the pace of defence develop- 
ment has been increasing quite rapidly. The result of this new statement, 
if nothing further is ordered and nothing more is done beyond what is 
envisaged by the Prime Minister, will be to lift defence expenditure to £430M 
in 1967/68.

            This program will provide Australia with defence forces which 
will be capable of rapid expansion in time of emergency and which will be 
able to play a most effective part in our own defence. When we consider the 
threats that could confront Australia it is my belief that we cannot do less 
than we are in fact doing. We may all regret the necessity to divert an 
increased proportion of our resources towards our own defence, but inter- 
national circumstances quite beyond our control have made this necessary.

            The first duty of the Commonwealth Government is to provide for 
the defence and security of Australia and its people. A great deal has 
been done through a system of alliances with our friends, but the necessities 
of our presént situation have made it inevitable that we should do more in a 
direct fashion for ourselves, and this the Government has done.



                                   o0o

