<!--start metadata-->
Title: Immigration
Description: Press release
Date: 13/08/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  â/Aw7z-/716%V 7- .C246.17 .


    PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA COMMON'WEP.i_TH PAPCLIAivIENT OFFICES 
                            400 FLINGERS STRE'T
    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVESMELBOURNE. VICTORIA 3000
                            TEL. E2 2521










PRESS RELEÿ.. :c,          13th August, 1973.

THE HON. MALCOLM FR .SER, M.P.
OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN ON IMMIGRATION AND LABOUR.









Migrants have contributed greatly to the development 

of Australia and Australian industry. Many key industries, 

including the building, steel and car manufacturing 

industries, could not have expanded without their 

skilled assistance.



The base of Australian culture has been broadened with 

the inflow of migrants who have added enormously to 

the depth and richness of Australian life.



Liberalarty policy is to pursue growth, but growth

alone is not enough. We must place an equal emphasis

on quality of life factors. Only with this balanced

view, can every Australian, new and old, be assured of

his or her basic right - "the good life". With a continued

substantial migrant intake, Australia's resources can be

fully developed to enable us to meet the demands put upon

a modern society to help the .socially disadvantaged.



For these reasons, we would have preferred a higher skilled 

migrant intake and the Gover.•nent's decision reflects a 

pessimistic outlook for the future of Australia„ Since 

they have cut the migrant intake level, the Government 

should concentrate on attracting skilled migrants who 

are now short in the building industry, for example, which 

affects all home owners, and in the steel industry, w:ir.n 

affects everyone. A higher skilled migrant target -;;;Ie

help achieve additional production capacity which, in turn, 
would alleviate the bottlenecks now occurring in such 
industries.

Furthermore, under the present Government's policy, it 
is likely that the percentage of active skilled workers 
as opposed to dependants will be less. Whilst the 
Opposition supports the reunification of families, 
changed emphasis will mean that the target of 110,000 
will do little to assist the acute shortage of skilled 
workers which is now present.

However, I repeat that what Australia needs is skilled 
migrants who will add not only to the physical streAgth, 
but to the culture and depth of life in Australia.

We believe -i,hat Wustralia has the capacity to provide a 
good life for many millions more people than now reside 
in this country, and it will be the Liberal Party's 
objective to pursue that ideal.

