<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wage indexation
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 21/09/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   Leader of the Opposition




   ELECTORAL TALK   FOR SUNDAY SEPTEMBER 21, 1975

                     THURSDAY SEPTEMBER 25, 197



   The decision by the full bench of the Arbitration and 
   Conciliation Commission to give wage indexation a further 
   trial leaves the Australian trade union movement with a 
   clear choice.

   It must abide by the guidelines which the Commission had
 • laid down, or it must face the prospect of higher unemployment.

   The history of indexation so far indicates that it is a
•  fragile structure at best, and that it will work only if the 
   people concerned want it to work.

   Before the Australian Council of Trade Unions Congress 
   met the Opposition called on it to support wage indexation.
   We did so because the government has nothing to take its place.

   All its incomes policy eggs are in this one basket.

   Unfortunately extremists in the union movement have made it 
   clear they will do anything in their power to bring wage 
   indexation down.

   This is not a majority opinion but it endangers the whole 
   structure.

 • It must also be remembered that if one section of the union 
   movement presses wage claims beyond the capacity of the economy
•  to meet these claims, then they will put other trade unionists 
   out of work. This must be the ultimate in selfishness.

   Nor can these militants plead ignorance. The Commission made 
   it clear in the original judgement that if even a small
   section of the union movement rejects indexation, then the 
   whole concept would fail.

   Since then, the declining economy and rising unemployment 
   have made the situation even more critical.

   By the Government's own admission the budget is likely to 
   result in unemployment of 400,000.

   If the Government's income policy fails then the number of 
   people thrown out of work must inevitably be higher than 
   even this forecast.



   Commonwealth Offices, 4 Treasury Place. Melbourne, Victoria 3002

              -2-


  The government through its own actions has endangered wage 
  indexation. It raised indirect taxation on beer, cigarettes 
  and petrol in the budget, and then said it wanted the effect 
  of these increases excluded from the price index which forms 
  the basis of wage indexation.

  It also rejected indexation of taxation, for which the trade
  union movement had pleaded, and which, on the basis of wage 
  indexation, is elementary justice.

    recently  o the Prime Minister brought in a
  superannuation scheme for the public Service which adds to 
  government costs and poses a challenge for the private 
  sector which will be difficult or impossible to meet.

  It was a further example of the disastrous pace-setter principle 
  for the Public Service which contributed to the dismissal of 
  the former Labor Minister, Clyde Cameron.

  The section of the trade union movement which has been the 
  first to flout the Arbitration Commission and the government 
  is the Amalgamated Metal Workers Union.

  They are going ahead with a claim for an extra $35 a week for 
  workers in the oil industry.

  This rejection of wage indexation in favour of collective 
  bargaining can lead only to the conclusion that the leaders of 
  this powerful trade union are prepared to see workers lose 
  their jobs for the short term benefit of their own members.

  In these circumstances there is a heavy responsibility on
  the Australian Council of Trade Unions and on its President,
• Mr Hawke.

  He cannot leave it to individual unions to decide how
• sincerely they should support the government and the Arbitration 
  Commission.

  The ACTU and Mr Hawke must show genuine leadership in defending
  indexation against such threats as that posed by the metal 
  workers.

  If the thrust for higher over-award payments is pressed and 
  becomes general then inflation must become very high with 
  consequent disastrous effects on unemployment.


              0000000

