<!--start metadata-->
Title: Draft radio talk
Description: radio talk
Date: 9/12/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                        (DRAFT)             Radio 9/12/56

         I had to record this talk a few days ago because by the 
time you hear it I will be married and out of the electorate until
after the New Year.   My Secretary, Mrs. Terry,will look after any 
urgent correspondence from the Commonwealth Parliament Offices, Leib., 
in the meanwhile.
         It is one day short of a year since I became your Member 
of Parliament. It has been an eventual year, if on the domestic front 
a quiet one.
         Major problems confronting the Government before inter- 
national crises came to a head were financial ones and our ears were 
tuned to the Prime Minister's economic statements and our minds were 
set to debating the rights and the wrongs of various Government
measures designed to                inflation and to set out over- 
seas balances in order.
         Perhaps the most important step the Government tool in this 
direction was the little budget of the autumn.
         In addition to these financial measures, there was the 
important StevedorinL Bill brought forward in an effort once more
to bring greater peace and harmony to the waterfront. There was 
the Arbitration Bill steered through a lengthy session of Parliament 
by the Minister for Labour and National Service, the Rt. Hon. Harold 
Holt: a bill which should speed up the process of arbitration and 
do away with grievances prevalent under the old system.
         'e have had two special,Premiers' conferences - one under 
the auspices of the Treasurer, JAN Sir Arthur Fadden, and one chaired
by the Prime Minister.  Both proved useful as an exchange of ideas 
between the different States and the Commonweal th but both were 
unhappily unsuccessful in reaching any uniform plan to attack our 
current financial problems.
          More recently our own difficulties have been pushed right 
into the background by the international tensions that have once
again divided the Nations of the world.  The unhappy events in Europe 
 and the Middle East outline once again the very real fact that 
 AustraliWie one of the two or three best countries in the world to 
 live in and for Australians it should most certainly be the best.

                                                       0,4k_









T r~~.., .,e~.. well -    mo 
                    : a-- -~ 9.  Because I know vary well 






have been isolated by distance and by time from world events in 






Europe I think we realise now how very close and how very small





modern inventions/in science have made the world.  Certainly 






our Minister for External Affairs, the Rt. Hon. R.G. Casey, 






has boldly and well put forward our view in the Councils of the






world.    He has befriended and come to understand on a personal 






basis many of the people in the countries of our north - a thing 






which is vital to us in our present world position, being the 






only western nation with a western civilisation moui in what is 






generally called the Far East.






            This will be my last talk over this Station for 






sometime, but early next year before the House sits again I 






will re-cora:ence my talks to you the electors of Wannon.






            I hope at times you have enjoyed these talks.






I believe, as I have said before, it is part of my job to report 






to the electorate on what is happening in Canberra and what 






my views are and what the Government thinks and intends to do






about problems which arise.   I cert,inly don't expect everyone 






who listens or reads what I say to agree with me, but at least 






when I•put forward my views or theb views of the Government and 






I explain the Government's action you will then know what has 






been done or what I think; if you disagree you can take me to 






task about it.






            I have enjoyed making these reports and will look 






forward to being on the air over Wannon again early next year.










43                   c>621






             yrl-t                      -f.d.








c„.„..14



                                          ~


i,„,_   c>,44_               ~.










c.,

