No Greens-win, many of us right wingers want to stay the hell out of the Middle East. Nothing is going to stop that sh.thole of the world from tearing each others' throats out.
After all, they have been doing it successfully for centuries.
Then you better start educating your hard right mates about Greens' renewable energy. Sooner we end our addiction to arab oil and middle eastern exports, like live animals, the sooner we can distance ourselves.
I am not saying that all Muslims are like this. However, I am saying that many, many of them are. They are flying under the radar and getting strong, just like Hitler's Storm Troopers before little Adolph rose to power.
Sensationalist right? No one thought much about little Adolph and his brown shirted followers, until they stormed to power, whilst the do gooders stood by and tut tutted.
If you are a student of history you can see exactly what is happening here. Soon it will be too late, it most probably already is.
Just when Sydney-siders thought it was safe to close their eyes and go to sleep for a night, pondering the lack of evening gun battles lately, they learn of something worse than drive by shootings.
As they woke to another day’s work the people of Sydney [and Melbourne] learned of a joint operation between their States’ Police forces and the Australian Federal Police, against an imminent terrorist attack in their cities.
Four men - all Australian citizens - were arrested this morning as federal and state police, armed with search warrants, swooped on members of the suspected terror cell this morning in the second-largest counter-terrorism operation in the nation's history…. About 400 police raided homes in the northern Melbourne suburbs of Glenroy, Meadow Heights, Roxburgh Park, Broadmeadows, Westmeadows, Preston and Epping. They also raided homes at Carlton in inner Melbourne and Colac in southwestern Victoria. (source)
The intention, apparently, was to attack a Sydney army base:
Authorities believe the group is at an advanced stage of preparing to storm an Australian Army base, using automatic weapons, as punishment for Australia's military involvement in Muslim countries. It is understood the men plan to kill as many soldiers as possible before they are themselves killed. Members of the group have been observed carrying out surveillance of Holsworthy Barracks in western Sydney and other suspicious activity around defence bases in Victoria. Electronic surveillance on the suspects is believed to have picked up discussions about ways to obtain weapons to carry out what would be the worst terror attack on Australian soil.
Not interested in the middle East conflict? You should be, that's your future right there.
We are inextricably linked to the conflicts in the Middle East. As a result of long term migration of Muslims into our Country we now have a burgeoning Muslim population. One only has to look at England to see the catastrophic problems that are a daily occurrence there.
What we now have is ISIS the latest metamorphosis of the latest radical Islam cult to take a tilt at the championship for the most blood thirsty western hating cult to rise in the Middle East.
It's too late to shut the gate as we now have young Muslims, embracing ISIS ideals and as far as they are concerned, we infidels are a team of sh.t.
It's gratifying to see Labor going with the Liberals on this one. If ever we need a united front, to deal with these people who take everything that is good in our Country then betray us by going radicals, it is now.
We need to get rid of them and get rid if them quick. I say, allow them to go to these places of their choice but their papers need to be marked - Never To Return - EVER!
What a load of over-sensationalized crap. The Muslims are actually less trouble than are the Aussies. And if we had never interfered in their countries they would be no trouble to us at all.
you are an incredibly stupid person which is why few debate the patent nonsense you come up with such as this.
So you're saying the statistics will show that Muslims are more likely to be criminal than Aussies? And we've been interfering in the Mid East for over one hundred years now, time for us to 'pack' off out of there, don't you think!
That's a useless comparison ....Muslim is a religion, and Australian is a nationality. What about crimes committed by Muslims whose Grandparents emigrated here, do you classify them as Muslim or Aussie???
As many as 100,000 Aboriginals may have been slaughtered by 'Aussies', I don't blame Christianity for that. And what about the grandparents, if they've behaved 'worse' it would be because of the influence of their new home. How could it be anything else? They would have had their aussieness brow-beaten into them.
GA, I think the last time we had a real bang on here was the Rum Rebellion right?
Now I don't think there would be too many Australians who would like to have a Jihadist' bang on' here, it could get really messy.
Most probably a lot of bewildered innocents who said it would never happen, would be collateral damage as the Muslims promote their promise to 'have the gutters run red with infidels' blood" (a direct quote incidentally from their propaganda)
Greens -win, I am comparing Muslims to Storm Troopers. Do you have any idea what the Muslims are up to in Iraq? ISIS are committing genocide on a grand scale to anyone to doesn't belong to the right branch of Islam.
They are not like the Storm Troopers of Germany, they are much, much worse.
It's gratifying to see Labor going with the Liberals on this one. If ever we need a united front, to deal with these people who take everything that is good in our Country then betray us by going radical, it is now.
But still, comparing religion and country of birth is a circular argument. Any Australian born Muslim who commits a crime under your definition would be 'Aussie', not Muslim.
All Muslims?
You are on a hate speech, hiding behind a keyboard, about all muslims and that makes you a fanatical terrorist.
You are part of the current problem, not part of the solution ... unless your agenda is a religious world war.
If that is so, then come out of hiding and admit it. have some guts and tell the truth for once.
The majority of terrorist attacks are committed by non-Muslims and, as such, they just aren't interesting enough to make the news.
The non-Muslim attacks are recorded though, by the FBI, Europol, etc.  I posted information from them before.  You remember that?  It showed that most terrorist attacks are carried out by non-Muslims. Of course you remember
we have a very nasty element happening in the middle east it is growing like a cancer...are they from all different walks of life?? who cares.. they are doing the WRONG THING..they are killing people for not following them...they are not only proud of it they are showing the world.. its all about FEAR...
sorry but I do not see this FEAR anywhere else but in the middle east.... prove me wrong.
Once you go to each year, do a word search of 'Islam' and 'Muslim'.  Let me know your results
Most terrorist attacks are carried out by non-Muslims.
I've provided you with the proof, yet somehow I don't think you are willing to accept it.
If you want to keep drinking the kool-aid, that's your choice.
I prefer to live in the real world.
Cheers.
so ISIS is not American/Australian/Musliim...
btw wiki is a bit out of date...
so where did it spring from ??   and which religious group are they doing their best  persuading people to join.. unless they want their heads on a pole.
just like to clear it all up thats all.
btw where would you class the Taliban???..
What part of that are you struggling to understand?
If you disagree with the FBI, please present your evidence.
And, the Taliban is is an Islamic fundamentalist terrorist organisation.
Anything else I can help you with?
Let's face it, other than the 'internal' ones i.e US nutjob Militias and the IRA (who seem to have calmed down a lot lately) most attacks do seem to be Muslim extremists. Just count the ones carried out by extremists from the ISIS and all the stuff in the African nations and Afghanistan.
Oh, so NOW you're saying "other than".  Nice try, again.
Let's not say "other than", OK?
Most terrorist attacks around the world are carried out by non-Muslims. Simple, undeniable (and verified) fact.
NO I'm not saying 'other than....which you seem to want to believe...I'm saying WORLDWIDE, post 2001 (recent history). The Sunni and Shiite muslims have been killing each other for 1200 years. Which religion is involved in the killing and terror attacks in Somalia, Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, Israel/Gaza, England etc???
Islam.
And yet, the fact still remains, most terrorist attacks, worldwide, since 2001 are carried out by non-Muslims.
Let's face it, other than the 'internal' ones i.e US nutjob Militias and the IRA ...
NO I'm not saying 'other than....which you seem to want to believe..
And now the lying and backpedaling starts.
You said it, now own it: "other than".
Perhaps you should do the WHOLE quote???
In the last 10 or 15 years, most of (more than half) the terror attacks/deaths have been the result of Islamic Extremists. Ok, so 'maybe' it was because of the 'Coalition of the Willing' post 9/11. But that may have simply been that the Western Media actually started reporting those things after the WTC attacks.
Says who? The Wikipedia links you posted don't even mention one African incident. You are talking out of your ass greggorry. Post some better information.
There's been hundreds in Iraq alone.
The Iraq terrorist attacks are reported.
You need to look harder:
Jihadists issuing their warning that the beheadings will continue if the U.S. continues to support the KurdsHours after shocking world with desert execution of 300 Syrian soldiers, ISIS parade Kurds dressed in Guantanamo-style suits, behead one and promise to kill them all unless USA pull out of Iraq
Survivor: Mohammed, whose name has been changed out of fears for his safety, was forced to attend an Islamic State children's campSurvivor of ISIS children's camp reveals how young boys are whipped and made to watch men being crucified and women stoned to death
In the last 10 or 15 years, most of (more than half) the terror attacks/deaths have been the result of Islamic Extremists.
In the last 10 to 15 years, most (more than half) terrorist attacks have been carried out by non-Muslims.
I've already provided the proof of this.
If you refuse to believe, that's your problem. Go on crossing the road every time you see a Muslim on your side of the street, if that makes you feel safer.
No, actually you have NOT..your 'proof' ends in 2005, which is 9 years ago..how many non-mulim terror attacks happened between 2005 and 2014, and how many muslim terror attacks happened in the same period??
Well just for the July section of that Wiki link, about 26 out of 31 attacks were Muslim inspired attacks.
I believe you.
However, we're talking about "since 2001", aren't we?
If you want to narrow it down to July 2013, there may indeed be more Muslim attacks.
The goal posts seem to be moved with every new post you make.
At least I can agree with you on one point: most terrorist attacks carried out on behalf of Islam, are perpetrated by Muslims.
Well it's YOUR link, not mine...but so July 2013 isn't an accurate test...can you show the non-muslim terror attacks between 2001 and 2014, as a percentage of the TOTAL terror attacks for the same period??
Just putting history aside for the moment, there is the current situation of ISIS carrying out Genocide on innocent civilians in numbers which are countless thousands.
Now that is something to get concerned about.
It is no different to the genocides carried out in Bosnia, Rawanda etc. the list just goes on and on.
The only reoccurring phenomena is the muted response from the United Nations in each and every episode of Genocide. The blue bereted troops, stand by, whilst monsters carry out atrocities even to the point where the Dutch UN troops handed over thousands of people they were supposed to be defending in Bosnia. They were subsequently slaughtered.
The alarming thing is that Barrack Obama has come out and said that the U.S. has 'no strategy' where ISIS is concerned.
Then it had better get one and in a hurry, the  impotent U.N. will do what they always do in massacres of innocents i.e. Nothing!!
The researchers used the University of Maryland definition of "terrorism": "the threatened or actual use of illegal force and violence by a non-state actor to attain a political, economic, religious, or social goal through fear, coercion, or intimidation".
It did not include casualties from government-backed action such as aerial bombing or other killings."
However, the majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims.
I've looked over your links and they are crap.
You'll have to take that up with the FBI, and Europol.
When you eventually contact them, and tell them that they are wrong, could you please get back to me and let me know what they said.  I'm genuinely interested.
I've looked over your links and they are crap. You are wrong greggorry.
I read the links.  Where is the 'crap?'
They don't mention hardly any of the incidents. There's been thousands in Pakistan, Iraq and Afghanistan alone. One link is the USA in 2001 ??????
can you name the non muslim terrorists and the attacks they have made lets say since 2002 the Bali Bombing..
I dont like blaming someone or group when in fact its someone else doing the evil deeds..
we need names... we can all name a Muslim terrorist group... give us the non muslim so we can understand more.... and how much they have done will help..
Clearly you haven't.
Let's assume that nobody has read them.
So, where is the "crap"?
Here's your chance to shine.
The only link you posted that is relevant is the List of Terrorist Attacks by Wikipedia. Above most of the pages from 2001 to now there is a little notice reading "This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it". Go and have a Bex and watch Every Hates Raymond greggorry.
Moreover, the fact that you didn't even attempt to substantiate your claim, means that you can no longer be taken seriously.
What am I talking about?  You were never taken seriously.
Since you aren't taken seriously because of your ludicrous comment which actually IS INCORRECT and you never substantiated any of your silly comments. That post you just made is moot as you never were taken seriously yourself.
Substantiate your claim.
I have, at least six times in this very thread.
It's up to you to read the entire thread, in order to see where I have actually proven my point.
Of course, you will say "bullshit" and ask me to provide the links again.
However, you have already proven yourself to be stupid so, demonstrating your laziness and incopetence, as well, will not be a sensible move.  Stupid and lazy, isn't a good look.
No you haven't, and you have already proven yourself to be stupid so again your own post is moot and unsubstantiated.You going through life fat dumb and stupid is no way to spend it son
Now what I mean by that, the West has interfered in the Middle East for a long time (I am not talking about the intentions here, because, at least some of that "interference" was well intended, just poorly administered). As such, we have some responsibility in having facilitated the current problems there.
so what are your thought on the Ukraine?.. at this very moment they believe Russia is going to WAR with them Russia being MIGHTY.. Ukraine being a sitting duck...
so what do you say... look the other way.should they call for help?..
t would be nice to think that we (the so superior) West could do some significant self reflecting and recognise our own part in generating the "problems" in the world, however, I am doubtful that we as a people have the integrity en masse or the self confidence en masse to be able to accept that burden and still feel ok about ourselves...
why do you say that???... if trying to stop one group of people annihilating another... [for reasons that usually escape myself]...is abhorrent
what do you call turning a blind eye?..
I would  be more ashamed if we went about  our business as if all this killing wasnt happening..
for me to see heads hanging on fence posts...
that tells me something is very very wrong somewhere...
no it isnt on our shores... but what if it were.. and the rest of the world turned a blind eye.. and said..
well basically get on with it none of our business!
please dont tell me thats not what you are saying because thats the way it comes across.
you call it interfering...I call it going to someones aid in a crisis... someone who is usually weaker than we are.
I already have, dear.
Scroll back through this thread and you will see that I have proven beyond all doubt that the majority of terrorist attacks are carried out by non-Muslims.
That's not to say that some Muslims don't indulge in terrorism: they certainly do, and nobody is denying that.
However, when it comes to the number of attacks across the world since 2001, they are in the minority.
The blue bereted troops, stand by, whilst monsters carry out atrocities even to the point where the Dutch UN troops handed over thousands of people they were supposed to be defending in Bosnia. They were subsequently slaughtered.
Watch Tony Blair and George Bush in the opening of that YOUTUBE video, apologise to ISLAM and to moslems, post 9/11 - when they began their 'war on terror'.
Watch Tony Blair and George Bush declare to the world the bona fides of ISLAM as a peace loving religion.
Time has moved on, it is 2014, and Tony Blair and George Bush are both out of office.But in exactly the same way that Tony Blair and George Bush refused to confront what ISLAM is, our political leaders in the West, today, are still 'leading us down the garden path'.And our political leaders in the West, today, are still refusing to confront what ISLAM is.And our political leaders are seeking to appease moslems and the moslem community.Both our own political leaders, and the moslem community, are lying to the citizens of Western nations - about the nature and the character of ISLAM.
It was only 20 years ago that Muslims of a certain region were asking Australian government to send troops to their dung heap of a country. Wish I can remember which one it was. General consensus was that no one was going to take those requests seriously -- unless requested by the British or American governments. Even then, I bet the public would have laughed it off.
Muslims have a tendency to take their religion a bit too seriously. Then there are those that think they are exempt from punishment, since they perpetrate crimes against non-Muslims. If Aussies showed the same level of criminality that Muslims do, then rape, murder, and a heap of other criminality characteristics would go through the roof.
Its not a religion its just an ideology and the faggots at the top pray on the simpletons of society feeding them bullshit. Allah does not and never will exist, these people are simpletons at best. Just look at the average intellect of the apologists here. They are all simpletons and don't even know what they are talking about. The Brian Ross's with their socks and Kamels of the wanna be mussey apologists is a joke. Gandalf is just a daft fool and if Isis in his Sunni mosque says jump he would simply ask how high. Blind thick spineless fools every one of them. Just a bunch of life sucking maggots on society to everything that is good. Truly ugly lonely evil sick people.
It seems you have overdosed on dogma and are unable to crack a fat. Don't give head!
If you feel so strongly why don't you volunteer to fight the people you hate.
That said, the current knee jerk strong man approach with our own home grown and more radicalised (every day) youth is ineffectual and inflammatory. To my mind it lays the ground work for the self fulfilling prophecy that at some point a significant terrorist act will happen on our shores. Why, because we are being inflammatory.
Firstly, let's be very clear, innocent people are dying in the Middle East, however, that is not isolated, innocent people are dying every day, world wide....
We may not want a religious war, we may not even want an ideological war, however, our part in history seems to indicate that, whether we want it or not, it could be coming our way. These young people who strongly feel the need to take up arms in the middle east are further radicalised if we tear up their passports and try to stop them going. We are to some degree being the tyrants the radicals perceive they are opposed to. Yep, once again, I think the intention is good, but poor practice.
Let them go to their little war, let's face it, listening to reason is not a strong suit for radicals, young angst driven people, or rusted on ideologues for that matter. So reasoning isn't going to cut it - let them go, but make it perfectly clear they will no longer have the capacity to re-enter Australia, either as a citizen or as a legal visitor. Let them make a commitment for life.
Further, if (I think it is still a big if too) we (the Royal we, as in the West) do feel the need to "go in their with our military might" then we also need to not go half paced.
Make no mistake, I am not a fan, advocate or groupie for war/terrorism (it often seems one in the same), but, I understand the mechanics of this stuff enough to realise that a half arsed response will be calamitous. In effect, if we are going to do it, implement a clear and overt take no prisoner policy and use extreme force.
That is if....
Of course we either will not go in, maybe drop a few bombs and wring our hands briefly about some collateral damage, then the media will analyse and re-analyse what we did for weeks, months, years to come...Yet there will still be a "problem" to deal with... Or, we will go in and kill a few of our own young men and women and, once enough money has been spent/made, pull out and wait for the next carbuncle on the backside of humanity to take root somewhere in the world....
It would be nice to think that we (the so superior) West could do some significant self reflecting and recognise our own part in generating the "problems" in the world, however, I am doubtful that we as a people have the integrity en masse or the self confidence en masse to be able to accept that burden and still feel ok about ourselves...
You obviously don't understand the difference between a threat, and something that has actually happened.
The majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims.
I am still waiting for you to give me the number of the post you claim where you have listed all the other terrorist non muslim groups..... that are a threat to the rest of the world.. and not just Americans who we know are capable of just about any crime.....  on their own soil...
this is about terrorism world wide...and judging by the Number of Australian and British [madmen] that have rushed to join the mad army....it is pretty much worldwide..
Click on whichever year you want to investigate, and you will see a list of attacks and who carried them out.
Moreover, I did not say anything about "a threat to the rest of the world".
What I have said is, "The majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims."
Read it very carefully.  It is 100% correct.
well yes I have browsed wiki...very long...I thought you had some well known names up your sleeve...
you know wiki going back years when even the worst terrorist groups were not CHOPPING OFF HEAD AND DISPLAYING THEM ON FENCE POSTS..
even the IRA never stooped that low did they?..
NAZI Germany was not a muslim country.... but it did come close..cleansing..forcing people to join or else..death in a very nasty way.. because you were not of their BELIEF...over throwing other govts.
it all depends on how you perseive the evil that one human can do to another human... I guess.. you may not think that evil.. terrorism is getting worse and stronger....I read somewhere where 100.000 have been killed in Syria by ISIS...which is a muslim group...
no matter where I look no other terrorist groups seem to come anywhere near what is happening today...
So what is the bodycount from Islamic terrorism compared to non Islamic terrorism ...
Quote:
Not at all.  If you know the answer, please post the figures.  I'd be very interested in seeing them.
You see, I'm not claiming that Muslim terrorist attacks have resulted in less deaths.  I'm merely stating the fact that the majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims.
Really?
How did you get that, from this:
Check out your FBI link for the bodycount, it appears the muslims are winning that one.
How many deaths did the graffiti which was called a terrorist attack result in?
Dr Jamal Rifi a prominent Muslim leader this morning on Sunrise condemned the actions of ISIS.
He stated that the Azzizzis had lived in peace with Muslims in the Middle East for thousands of years. He stated that through that period Muslims had not try to convert them by force to Islam nor had they waged war on them.
He claims ISIS has reinvented Muslim ideology and that the mainstream of 500,000 Australian Muslims do not support this ideology.
He also stated that young people were at danger of being drawn into a Jihadist ideology and that the leaders of the Muslim Community in Australia were working hard to stop this happening.
He named one of his sons Jihad.
Talk about mixed messages.
Jihad is not a violent concept.Jihad is not a declaration of war against other religions. It is worth noting that the Koran specifically refers to Jews and Christians as "people of the book" who should be protected and respected. All three faiths worship the same God. Allah is just the Arabic word for God, and is used by Christian Arabs as well as Muslims.Military action in the name of Islam has not been common in the history of Islam. Scholars says most calls for violent jihad are not sanctioned by Islam.Warfare in the name of God is not unique to Islam. Other faiths throughout the world have waged wars with religious justifications
NorthofNorth, don't take my S.M.E.A.C. message too literally, Just a little military joke from bygone days. In the Airfield Defence Guards my Mustering the R.A.A.F.  in Vietnam days, we were always having S.M.E.A.C. shoved down our throats and we got to saying you can use S.M.E.A.C.  for everything from taking out the rubbish to going on Patrol.
I believe the latest news that the R.A.A.F. will be doing Weapon and Supply drops to the Iraqi Forces is the thin end of the wedge.
I also believe that the 24 Aircraft that comprise our Super Hornets fighter jets will be itching to get over there. What better theatre of War and it is a War to try out our latest weaponry.
If the Yanks continue with air strikes which I also think will be enlarged, then it will only be a matter of time before our fighter jets are there too.
I have mixed emotions on this one because 'something' has to be done about the wholesale genocide going on there. ISIS cannot be allowed to grow strong and mighty like a new version of Nazis Germany.
There are huge lessons to be learned from WW2 e.g. When Neville Chamberlain arrived back in England infamously waving his 'Peace in our Time' document, shortly afterwards (days) the Nazis marched into Poland.
We as a world community, cannot allow something as sinister as ISIS to grow strong and virulent.
The price to pay for not getting involved, pales into insignificance, as to what will happen if these modern day Nazis are allowed to take over the Middle East.
This is not a fight the west can win by engaging itself (or being lured into) another middle east murderous black comedy.. The 'dragon' of Islamism can only be subdued from within by those from the region.
Islamism is solely a force for destruction which is fueled by the zeal of psychopaths which, in its turn, is fueled by luring foreigners directly into the fray. This is how the psychopathic scum (many of them ironically are Islamist turds from Europe) 'justify' their need to murder... Without foreign fighters on their soil, they will turn on other Muslims... Their point is to kill and nothing else.
The only viable solution is to arm the Kurds and assist them without our being directly involved... They, too, are Muslim, which acts as an antidote to Islamism by revealing its sectarian underbelly... It also reveals the lie to the claim of Muslim 'brotherhood'...
You silly prat, the first  and third talk about the US only, the last one clearly identifies Al Qaida inspired terrorists as the main threat to European countries. The Wiki is clear that since 2000, Islamic terrorism is the main danger.
Whatever way you cut it. There is no disputing that ISIS are heavily involved in 'ethnic cleansing'. The latest atrocity was on TV last night. They marched 250 Syrian soldiers in their underpants made them lie in a line then gunned the lot of them.
A stand must, must be made against ISIS. They must be ripped to pieces.
It's one thing to wage war and another thing altogether to carry out the wholesale genocide they are carrying out.
lets be fair.. I am very interested in the names of these terrorist groups that are doing more than muslim terrorist groups will ever do...
I have posted the links to their names in this thread.
Go back a few pages, and you will find them.
I have all I can find is C&P from America...can you at least give me the post number...I do hate putting you to this trouble but I cant just take someones word for things...I am sure you understand...
well ISIS for instance doesnt mind posting their atrocities on the web... for a start... and they are or at least were very good at making videos... aka Osama bin laden...
the gentlemen that have left our shores to support certain terrorist groups in Syria...havent been shy either...and they are muslim through and through.
I dont want to hate all muslims....but its not easy when they seem very shy about condemning whats going on..
I don't disagree with anything you've said, cods.
However, the majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001, have been carried out by non-Muslims.
What you see on the "news" isn't a true representation of the overall picture of what's happening in the world.
And, just to note, Muslims who don't condemn Muslim terrorist groups are probably concerned about their heads: the crazy Muslims wouldn't think twice about chopping off the heads of those who condemn them.
I understand we on ly get told what we think we want to know.. I get that.. I thought you had the proof though..you know when you c&p American.. it is always about America...what affects them...its as if the rest of the world doesnt matter..
for instance MH17 there wasnt one American on it.. so to me there has been very little input from America...on solving that crime..no I dont think terrorists..but holy hell someone is responsible..
I also get why muslims dont condemn... does that make it right though???&gt;...I am one of these people that believe the more that stand up and condemn the more they will see they are not on the right track.... the more people afraid of them the stronger they get.
I know easy when I am not a muslim... but they scare me..
I would still like some names or nationalities nut cases aside...I can handle one offs... its these cell things that bother me..
Great Britain has just raised its Terrorist level to Severe, which equates to a Terrorist Attack is Likely.
Tony Abbott has stated that Australia's Terrorist Threat level will remain at Medium for now. Look forward to this level being raised a the game of high stakes Jihad is played out in the Middle East.
I believe Abbott is making a very serious mistake indeed in not allowing Muslims to go fight in the Middle East. By restraining them here in Australia he is begging for a terror attack on home soil. Nothing ferments trouble like trying to put it in a bottle and cork it.
If this gambit continues, I am tipping some rough times for Australia right here.
The cynic in me suggests this is exactly what our Dear Leader desires.  Nothing would suit his agenda better than to have an Australian populace panicked and looking for blood.
And this is why you are held in such wide contempt - you are a cynic without brains or comprehension, not as a result of a cohesive understanding of anything. You are a cynic because it is easier for you than actually thinking.
Exactly.
And there's the other numpty,  jumping eagerly right onto the opportunity to show himself up as ... well,, another numpty.
Yup - send 'em off overseas with our blessings - get them to call home on the mobile so we can track 'em and send in the drones...
As for Big To - of course the only thing that might save him and his government would be a war of some kind... worked for his heroine Maggie thatcher, whose government promptly hid away the wounded veterans of that conflict so as not to upset the public.
Soren, it is comments like you which reinforce my cynicism.  I wonder how can someone who claims such superior intelligence be actually so foolish and bigoted all the time.
he is a HERO.. well done to him..
the trouble is YOUNG people the emphasis on YOUNG.... almost always get dissatisfied and look for someone else to tell them how worthy they are  a bit of bullying or racism at school can do so much harm,...and this is where these cults get their hands on them...they train their brains to hate everything that thinks different to them..they end up bitter and twisted at a very young age... very hard to change.
You make stupid assertions (although it is not illegal) and then demand proof that you have made stupid assertions. The proof is everywhere you look, numpty.
i'm interested in the origin of the word "numpty"i agree it fits greg to a tee, just wondering where it came from?
an insulting word for a person who is stupid or who does something badlySynonyms or related words for this sense of numptySomeone who is unintelligent, stupid or silly: boxhead, numpty, fool, buffoon, clown, idiot, maniac, dope, duffer, airhead...
This list of terrorist attacks committed by Muslims since 9/11/01 (a rate of about five a day) is incomplete because not all such attacks are picked up by international news sources, even those resulting in multiple loss of life.
These are not incidents of ordinary crime involving nominal Muslims killing for money or vendetta.  We only include incidents of deadly violence that are reasonably determined to have been committed out of religious duty - as interpreted by the perpetrator.  Islam needs to be a motive, but it need not be the only factor.
lets be fair.. I am very interested in the names of these terrorist groups that are doing more than muslim terrorist groups will ever do..
and I would like to know how come we don t read about them if they are blowing innocent people up..and driving them from their homes into the hills without food or water.. I want to know who they are..
It wouldn't matter, if we were the only Country in the World, where this conflict is being reported. The horrendous images of ISIS committing genocide have turned the strongest stomach, kids holding severed heads - our kids!!!.
We are not going to be like piss weak Neville Chamberlain in 1939. Abbott is right, we can't stand by whilst these bastards carry out Genocide.
Too often in the history of the world, Nations who were capable of doing something to stop the tyrants of history growing strong, have stood idley by.
indeed, I think Presbyterians are the most likely terrorists.heres a few pics of a Presbyterian sunday school group of boys.
You're confused, again.
I haven't said anything about "the most likely terrorists".  Nor have I suggested that Muslims aren't involved in terrorism.
What I have said is, the majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims.
Simple fact.  Don't shoot the messenger.
we know greg but for some unknown reason you keep expecting wiki to prove what you are saying...
can you tell me how many attacks other than islamic driven have taken place since 2001.....I bet you cant...yet you claim muslims do the least attacks....how can you make that statement over and over without figures..
not sure what the purpose of keep printing up wiki...as these are just about all MUSLIM based...and I got bored... I was hoping you had the list as you are so insistent muslims are out numbered when it comes to terrorist attacks...
I have never said that non-Muslim terrorist groups outnumber Muslim terrorist groups.
Simple fact.
hahahahahahahahaha..
what does the MAJORITY of TERRORIST ATTACKS have been instigated by NON MUSLIM GROUPS&gt;.. mean exactly...
you sent a list that was supposed to tell me more non muslim caused attacks have taken place since 2001...
me thinks you are having reading problems..
stop twisting everything around.. I will give you this like most lefties you are good at it...
Majority = the greater number.
Terrorist attack = the unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof in furtherance of political or social objectives.
Non-Muslims = people who do not practice Islam, or associate in any way with that religion.
Greggorry stated that non muslims did most terrorist attacks between 2001 and now. Go to his link and look at the very top of each year. It reads.........  This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it
So, have you expanded it yet?
If not, go here - http://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/ - and you will learn that the majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims.
Wrong again.
Can you substantiate that claim?
No, I didn't think so
Take your crumby website and go hunt for a Muslim community in your local area. I'll see you back on here in 10 years.
You've learnt two things today:- the majority of terrorist attacks around the world since 2001 have been carried out by non-Muslims. - lots of Muslims in Perth and Hobart.
You knock Taipan and I when we actually live amongst mulsims while  you live in 2 cities dominated by white people. Especially Hobart. I can see now why you love multiculturalism so much, you don't know it. You lefties are an absolute crack up.
Living amongst seems to indicate interactions. I imagine you and Taipan more living in areas where Muslims happen to live, not getting sun, not going outside for fear of the evil Muslim threat living next door, posting stuff on the internet and fluffing each other at 2 am.
there is a better solution and more likely.  USA is now only 6 years away from becoming an oil EXPORTER due to shale and tar oil extraction and horizontal drilling. Up SA's far north likes a shale oil deposit that would make Australia an oil exporter as well.  As canadas oil supplies com on stream other countries will be buying their oil from other countries than the M/E area to avoid the troubles there.
First, a good shale oil well, fully fracked, may produce in the region of 500 to 1,000 oil barrels a day, when it first starts producing. This is abysmal compared with a conventional oil well that typically produces in the tens of thousands of barrels a day.Second, after a year of production, the shale oil well will be producing at 50 per cent of its initial rate, and after two years at around 15 per cent of its initial rate, ie, the well is pretty much depleted.Third, the shale oil project has indeed increased crude oil production by some 2m b/d. Unfortunately to achieve this, in the Bakken shale oilfield alone, this has required the completion of 7,000 wells in a little over five years. To maintain production, some 200 rigs are in operation in the Bakken field, each one drilling a new well every month or so, ie, more than 2,000 new wells every year. Similar figures apply to the other North American shale oilfields.Fourth, proposals to further increase shale oil production in the US to replace the crude oil still being imported (more than 10m b/d) would require a massive further increase in the already frenetic drilling rate. Are we really to believe that it is actually physically possible to drill and complete several tens of thousands of shale oil wells each year and every year for the indefinite future? Since such an increase is in fact impossible, how exactly is the US going to achieve energy independence, or even maintain existing shale oil production rates?Fifth, shale oil wells are painfully expensive to drill given the quantities of materials consumed and the sophisticated drilling rigs they must use. While some wells can break even with an oil price of between $50 and $80 a barrel, many need more than $100 a barrel to stay solvent.Finally, the only investment destination worse than shale oil is shale gas. Think of it as shale oil on steroids as a way of losing money.
I haven't mentioned anything about the "worst terrorists" or terrorists that are supposedly "taking over countries".
You are lying. You could have demonstrated if it was true but stupidly - you think cleverly - you want others to disprove it. We all live with the daily news of Muslim terror. You should demonstrate it if the perception and of constant Muslim terror is incorrect.But you cannot because it is not. You are thick and ridiculous because it is not illegal.
Uh...actually Pec, it is happening. The U.S. is involved in air strikes and has been for over a week. Watch for these to be stepped up big time as many countries from Europe have signed on to get rid of ISIS.
One of our supply dropping aircraft was fired on this morning. U.S., Jet fighters responded.
The majority of terrorist attacks reported on TV are the ones carried out by Muslims.  No argument from me on that one.
I've proven this, at lease a half a dozen times.  You just can't handle the truth.  The media has brainwashed you into believing what they want you to believe.
Here's a little exercise for you: get on google and see if you can find any official reports that say the majority of terrorist attacks around the world have been carried out by Muslims.  If that's the truth, surely someone is reporting it, right?
Back in the kitchen princess, hubby wants a chicken tikka. You have to be a good little Pakistani housewife or hubby is going to smack you right across the face. You don't want his frustrations getting taken out on his taxi fare clients.
So this is about snobbery then? That's something you should get looked at. Well the Eagles are an international act and rude is a domestic act so it's hardly the same thing.
Not overly, I didnt think the Eagles were much chop either.
What sort of music do you think I like Outrage Bus??
I'm guessing Cold Chisel, Rose Tattoo eh
See, you are a stereotyper like us all. Join the club. Have another guess.
Well sorry it was either that or Rolf Harris.
Dirty old Rolf sure is better than the bloody Eagles. What were you thinking?? The last big act I saw was Leornard Cohen. before that Neil Young. I watched Spy vs Spy the other week. Just because I'm racist doesn't mean I don't like good music.
Isnt the part about music taste?
It's not that 'm racist Outrage Bus. In fact I'm not. I just hate self righteous people telling me how to think. The whole world is full of it. Who has the right to tell other people how to think??
You learn to live with it, Shakey. I have people telling me I'm a Paki housewife.
Chicken Tikka is an English recipe, dearie. It was originally made with tinned tomato soup. It was one of Queen Victoria's favourites.
Given you live in Rooty Hill and know so much about multiculturalism, you should know this. As you know, Rooty Hill was misspelt. It was originally called Roti Hill, due to your multicultural Curry friends settling the area.
Sparky and I discussed all this. He wasn't very happy about it if I recall.
My multicultural ghetto was originally called Parramatta Siding - an Aboriginal/English name.
Food for thought, eh?
Indians settled Rooty Hill and the old days????That's just as stupid as The Tank stream running underground in convict times. History just isn't one of your finer points Karnal. You ethnics have never been good at Australian history.
Ask Sparky, Shakey. He lives just down the road from you. We've been through all this before.
I don't remember. That Sparky must have been a smart chap. He knew that the tank Stream ran above ground.
And I'm a truck driver from Rooty Hill.
Not married to a bloke called Sparky by any chance, are you? He's a man of the world as well.
Oh he's a great man. You'd go for a good aussie man like him. In Pakistan the ladies love white blokes  I hear.
They don't marry outside their race, remember? They're inbreds.
Sparky would be most disappointed to hear you spouting multiculturalist propaganda like that.
I really did  poke your ego when I picked you up on your poor history. A trucker driver bogan from Rooty Hill knew something you didn't.
ISIS, thinks it's being clever beheading Sotoff but they have played right into the U.S.A.'s hands.
Stand by for massive retribution courtesy of the U.S. Air Force, this happened first time around but you can expect a bigger response this time.
The U.S. doesn't take kindly to human blackmail. They won't pay a ransom but they will hand out retribution. Wouldn't like to be in an ISIS encampment right now.
The US knows that by doing this, they would play right into ISIS's hands.
Sure the US doesn't take too kindly to blackmail. They have a policy of not paying ransoms. The reason Steven Sotloff is all over the news and not a dead Swedish or Japanese journalist is due to US policy - as difficult as that policy must be for those who impliment it. If they did pay ransoms, US citizens around the world could be much more at risk.
I can't think of anyone in the world who wants to see ISIS prosper. Surely a new rogue state in the Middle East is not in the interests of the Saudis. The Taliban maybe, but only because it takes the heat off them.
But having the US dragged into a new endless war is in the interests of many - Russia, China, and maybe even Iran if it kills off a few bloodthirsty Sunnis on their doorstep.
This time, the US needs to speak softly, even if it carries a big stick. The days of Wagner being blasted out of choppers and the smell of Nepalm in the morning are long gone. The actions of the last US administration has stymied US foreign policy for at least a generation - maybe more if the rot spreads, which in the case of ISIL, it clearly has.
Talking tough on ISIS is just self-indulgent. Quiet, decisive - and limited - action is required. The US's actions have allowed ISIL to come into being. Deposing Saddam and sacking the Ba'athists created a vacuum. Just being in Iraq sent an invitation to Al Qaida. Propping up Al Malaki and allowing him to create a corrupt, Shi'ite fiefdom gave the Sunnis a just cause.
ISIS is the direct result of the failure of US policy - failure on the biggest scale in living memory. The end result of the US invasion and occuptaion of Iraq is so different to US objectives as to present a millennial case study on what not to do in foreign intervention.
Massive retribution would be just plain dumb, and the US are in no position to try this. Air strikes are one thing, but rarely successful against insurgencies. This time, any boots on the ground need to be wearing blue berets.
Karnal I completely agree that due to the power vacuum left by the Middle East Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, power vacuums were made to exist.
This was the origin of ISIS.  However because a ten headed snake emerged out of the fog, is no reason for the U.S. to back off. In the contrary, the U.S. is working hard to get a coalition of Muslim Countries together, to fight ISIS whilst they back them with logistics.
It will be interesting to see just how this plays out.
Agreed, but I know how I’d feel if I was a Yank, and had to keep paying taxes - not to pay off the multi-ttrillion dollar US surplus, but to keep funding endless wars in the Middle East.
Many Australians don’t even want to fork out for tthe foreign aid we committed as part of the Millenium Goals. How do you think they’d feel if they saw war dollars coming out of health and education funding?
End the budget emergency, or sell a few more News Ltd newspapers?
You know, the ones with front page photos of someone’s son having their head cut off.
Karnal the thing we have in common is that we are both Vets. Any Vet worth his salt, would not stand by, whilst a monster commits genocide on hapless innocent people. We have to get involved, what do you think our forefathers at Gallipoli would think about this lot?
It's the best example. Defeat at Gallipoli had nothing to do with it Karnal, stop leg pulling. You know as well as I do that I am referring to the spirit of Anzac and what the core values of those diggers were.Could you see them tolerating these fascist cowboys of ISIS for 5 seconds?
It's the best example. Defeat at Gallipoli had nothing to do with it Karnal, stop leg pulling. You know as well as I do that I am referring to the spirit of Anzac and what the core values of those diggers were.
What a load of krap.
My great uncle fought in WWI. The one thing he told me - when he could lift his attention from the races on 2KY - was never let the bastards get to you.
He hated the spirit of Anzac. He knew that there is no spirit of Anzac. We ALL know that there is no spirit of Anzac.
The spirit of Anzac is 19 year old kids emptying their rifles to save ammunition before they say a quick prayer and run into Johnny Turk’s machine gun fire.
The spirit of Anzac is body counts and pinewood coffins being lined up in the shade.
The spirit of Anzac is little white crosses lined up in military formation as if on some limp dick parade.
Fck the spirit of Anzac. It’s the biggest con we ever had forced on us after rum, sodomy and the lash.
What a load of absolute shite Karnal just because you've got a relo who hated it, doesn't mean jack sh.t.
I have met diggers in my younger days on Anzac Day and had a beer with them and their attitude was anything but the mindless bile you are spewing out. What the f....k happened to your head in the Vietnam jungles?
That post of yours is he biggest crock of sh.t I have ever read on this site bar none!
he is so good at leaving kamel sh!te pats all over the forum.. I bet he wouldnt have the balls to sit with the diggers on ANZAC DAY and tell them what he has just written....
a bastard of the worst kind.
some have a knack of making you ashamed to be Australian...cruel words from a cruel heart.
This is not just a matter 'of being involved in Iraq again'. This is a matter of stopping a monster which is gaining strength every day, in it's tracks.
This monster butchers women and children by the thousands, this monster beheads victims then parades them on the media.
This monster is every bit as dangerous as the Nazis.
The Coalition of the willing need to get cracking and smash ISIS into the next world.
not if you are  green senator wishy wilson....he thinks terrorists are hard done by..
I would be happy with no involvement and watch them hack each other to death.  It would be a wake up call to the west and a poke in the eye for the luvvies who protest against the great satan. No aid, no nuffin.  Let the Arab league sort it out.
Negotiate with who ever is left who will be the baddest motherbuggerer in the region.
if we all sat back and watched the STRONG defeat the weak... where do you think the world would end up???...
do you think its right certain people because they have the guns..should have the right to push those who dont off the planet???
Karnal belongs right up there with Neville Chamberlain  and his, "Peace in our time" whilst the jackboots of the Nazis were marching into Poland as he waved that very piece of useless sh.t paper in the faces of the British declaring, "Peace in our time!"
If the strong don't act, the world will be overtaken by these Fascist Moslems called ISIS or suchlike. We are on a precipice right now. The big threat are the Jihadist Moslems, do we wait until they have conquered the entire Middle East with their genocide or do we go in and deal them out of the game?
he believed RB.. and lived in hope.. cant blame him for what Hitler turned out to be a LIAR and murderer..
I dont even know where the ANZACs came into a thread about more murderers to be honest... I just didnt like what he said thats all..we should honor our dead they paid the ultimate price..for someone being able to say... well what he said in 2014...on a public forum...if someone doesnt appreciate that then they need to take a good look at themselves...
if we tell the world we should have looked the other way in 1914 and 1939...do they really think we would all be sitting here eating the Sunday roast with not a care in the world???... do they really?.
imagine the spread of NAZISM where would it have ended if it ever did... well this to me is the same...where will it end if we ignore it??... will it come to our door...of course it will look at what we have to offer... we are a sitting DUCK.. the rest of the world is being over run by muslims... nice muslims that is...but how long before they too become twisted and full of hate.. if these mad Imams have their way.
We have learnt well from those losses karnal. Mainly about the ways to minimise deaths on our side. So why would we send in troops when we can send in drones.The nice people in ISIS truly are stuck back in the days of Gallipoli.We've moved onA pimply faced civil servant with wifi sitting in HQ in South Carolina is about to turn ISIS into toast.
Gud is great for providing us with these rightard weapons.Sure the barbarians will hate that, they,d love nothing better than troops on the ground.
You know, it's scarey Shiite when a magpie swoops you.  Soon everyone in ISIS will be living in fear of "the good news" falling from the sky.
Just wait til all the jihadists have had time to assemble, then it's game on.
Don't tell me we don't have enemies any more, only friends whose grievances we are yet to accommodate?
I must admit, old boy, I'm struggling to understand who these enemies are.
An ADF spokesman was on 7.30 the other night trying to pitch the government's message. The message he was selling was that we need to defend "Western values" and our alliance with the US. He repeated these things a number of times in the interview, which told me he was following the government's script.
There was no mention of humanitarian issues, preventing genocide or defending Shi'ites and Christians in Northern Iraq. For the ADF spokesman, it was all about our loyalty to the US and the vague, abstract notion of defending Western values.
All good reasons maybe, but I would have thought that defending innocents from slaughter would be a much easier sell.
We gave up promoting Western values in Iraq when we propped up the Shi'ite administration of Al Malaki. Mind you, we did make sure they privatized oil distribution before we pulled out, so there's that.
As for our loyalty to the US, it would seem Mr Abbott is much more keen to follow Uncle into this one than Obama is to go in.
Oh, and Mr Abbott's polling seems to be improving, so it's a win-win for all.
HAMAS killed the women and children by hiding behind their skirts....like the cowards they show themselves to be...if you hide your rocket launches in schools and churches ... then expect those who inhabit them to be in danger...thats all i can say.
Gud is great for providing us with these rightard weapons.
And the spider-veined faces in the ADF tell us drones don’t work against a force of over ten thousand heavily armed troops in the desert.
Drones are good against one or two badly equipped Taliban volunteers in the mountains. Drones aren’t yet capable of fighting armies.
Drones are used largely against civilians (or those posing as civilians), not well-armed troops who can defend themselves.
ISIL are begging for the opportunity to stage a long, protracted ambush against Uncle in the desert. Obey them, and you end up in Iraq again, or Afghanistan, or Vietnam. If we’ve learned anything in the last 50 years, it’s that you don’t engage in military operations without very clear objectives, and a viable alternative administration to hold them.
Wetting your pantaloons and yelling atUncle to do something - anything - is just stupid unless you have a viable plan.
Forget about it Karnal, your post about the Anzacs was enough for me, I didn't need my glasses to read that load of cobblers.
Well......I have a Father and a couple of Grand Uncles who would agree 100% with Karnal.
That 'Anzac Spirit' is post fact National jingoism readily peddled by the needy.  Saying so is not being disrespectful of the blokes who fought, or died or survived.  While they were there shooting and being shot at, they did not give a ferk about a 'spirit.'  It was shoot or be shot.
No worries, Red. They probably taught you we marched into Gallipoli, taught Johnny Turk a thing or two, played a few games of cricket, and came back in time for Christmas.
Now you know otherwise, feel free to reflect on our noble history of failed foreign interventions and apply them to the situation in the Middle East today - a situation we’ve played our part in, believe it.
If you and the defence contractors in the White House had listened a bit more carefully back in 2003, we would not be having such a frank exchange of views today.
All those neatly lined white crosses are there in Turkey and France and Belgium because the chumps  in charge were powerless to stop the empty, deafening roar that always precedes the march into battle.
If you want to be a part of that, be my guest, but don’t expect me to give up without a fight.
so when ISIS arrives on our doorstep you and aussie will be well and truly under the bed I guess along with your uncles and cousins who believe any form of war is for dills...and only to be disrespected... we get it.
The crappy alleged 'spirit' came much later for political purposes.
maybe you should move back to India and take kamel with you then..
Cods.....is that you using abusive language?  You know ~ the stuff you have been whingeing about in Feedback?  I go out of my way not to be personally insulting or personally critical of you (in fact, as a Member Run Board Mod I have acted to assist you) yet you are blind to your own hypocrisy it seems.
I am neither Indian, and nor do I know of a Member named kamel.
just telling you where to go.. is hardly calling you a pot of piss....
oh that right you believe in neither saying thank you nor remembering...do you.. aka the ANZACs  how could I forget that...
They drum that Anzac Spirit krap into new recruits the way they drill them in everything else. Weapon, gun, fighting, fun. The kids fall in line, just as football players stand in a row looking vacant with their hands on their dicks, trying to mouth the words of the national anthem before a game.
And when the Turks come down here, closely followed by the Vietnamese, and the Iraqis and the Afghanis and theISISies, we’ll send you in, dear, guns blazing.
The only thing you get, cods is the fantasy of the alleged honour and glory of having the beegeezus belted out of you in a War.  There is nothing sweet, nothing charming, nothing in itself to be admired.  It is grubby, non-humane and very terrible.  There is nothing to glorify.  That is for people who believe Biggles was real.  My Father and his Uncles got shot at, and they shot back.  The Great Uncles were lousy shots as they were killed.  My Dad survived WW2 and he metaphorically spat at the political wankers who wanted for their own purposes to seek votes out of military nationalism.  I remember wishing nothing more than wanting to join the Cadets at my High School in the mid 60s, and my Dad absolutely refusing to allow it on the basis that he did not want me to be playing at 'war.'  He reckoned he had paid the 'Family Dues,' in that regard.  For all of his Life, so far as I knew, he never, ever entered an RSL and he never marched in or watched an Anzac Day March/Ceremony ~ yet, on the day my Brother and I buried him, we learned that the Old Fart was a Life Member of the RSL.  That, my Dear Cods, is 'spirit,' of the private and honourable kind.
Later, my Brother was conscripted....taken out of his civilian job and plonked into the LNP's 'All the Way with LBJ' Military, potentially directly into Vietnam.  Thank ferk that Whitlam arrived and stopped the ships which were about to send my Brother to Vietnam.  My Old Man supported him every step of the way, but he never slept about it.
Long story....Brother stayed in ~ retired as a Brigadier, and he too will figuratively spit on your stupid vicarious claim about a 'spirit.'
This is covered in my new thread but I'll round off by saying that I don't expect an invasion of any kind by the Moslems., Why worry? They've got a decent percentage of 500,000  Moslems  here,  just itching to try out Jihadist stuff.
I mean it makes sense doesn't it? 500,000 Moslems here, even if only 5% want to sign up for the campaign, there's 2,500 potential terrorists right there, raring to go. That's a lot of suicide missions right?
Where do you get the 5% figure from?
What makes you think that 5% of Muslims in Australia are extremists/"potential terrorists"?
Well Greggerry, I had a bit of a look around of what would represent a reasonable percentage, given the popularity amongst our towel headed friends for the Jihad taking place in the Middle East and well, 5% just seemed like a chummy little number, of course I most probably vastly under estimated the true percentage of Moslems that hate our infidels' guts.
War is shite, and there is nothing to glorify whatsoever.  Nothing.
I dont want to hear you uncl;es glory days thanks you have said enough what you think what a fool he/they was..you dont have to go into details...
my baby hood was spent in a dug out shelter...
your family do you no justice or service.. I am glad I will never meet any of you...
they are not GLORIFYING WAR you stupid people..
they are saying THANK YOU...to those who did come back.. some in pieces...
Given how confusing what you post can be, I'm not sure who 'they' are.  If 'they' are my Great Uncles and Mates of my Dad who were blown into body parts, they are not saying 'thank you' at all.  They are saying, "Don't believe the bull-shite the Johnny Come Lateltys (Karnal's 'chocolate soldiers') will tell you is 'spirit.'
I'll fight when some bastard points a gun at me directly, here in this Country.  Stuffed if I'll support 'Abbott's War' in some place I have to look at a World Map to locate.
Being pointed in the direction of a region or a religion or a seventh century prophet and told to take out whatever moves is just asking for trouble. All you end up doing is running in and out of people’s houses, trying to interpret what they’re telling you wiith a gun to their head and their families screaming in the background.
It’s a recipe for PTSD on all sides with no winner, no loser, and no end. Back in the War To End All Wars, both sides came out to shake hands and sing Christmas songs.
Those days are long gone. The only enemy worth fighting today is the defeated, lumpen mass of ha has and gigglers who have so little to live for they want to kill everyone else off.
no THEY would have nothing to do with your family I can promise you..
I mean the people that line the streets,...
of course you guys dont take the day off do you??..
the people that buy the badges and the Legacy buttons and the Poppies...that say hey we dont forget
no no one would ask you to stand up for this country I am sure.. so settle down you can relax...
Following last week's admission by Obama that the US does not have a plan for ISIS, Julie Bishop has just said that getting rid of ISIL will be hard to do. According to Julie Bishop, ISIL is not just an army or a country, it's an ideology.
And how do you carpet bomb an ideology? How do you contain it? Destroy ISIL in Iraq, and they'll re-appear in Syria.
What Barack Obama means when he says the US does not have a plan is just that - the US does not have a plan. It looks like they're now leaning towards Assad in Syria after years of having him in the Axis of Evil.
And they would do anything for a new Saddam in Iraq. The US would do anything for a functioning secular state in the heart of oil country.
The Arab League will be discussing ISIS this week. This is the only hope. Only Arabs can deal with ISIS. If the US gets involved, Iraq will become the new front for global jihad. And let's face it, ISIS is a splinter group of Al Qaida, a Saudi creation.
The Saudis have been playing both sides for years. The Saudis receive weapons and training from the US, and similtaneously fund Al Qaida. The Saudis are the quietest geo-political player in the game. While Iran bangs on about Great Satans, the Saudis quietly get down to business. The Saudis are such good friends of Uncle that when a Saudi-backed terror group flew planes into the World Trade Centre, Uncle flew the bin Laden family out of America.
The Saudis will join the Arab League this week, but it's the Egyptians who will press the case for destroying ISIS. The Egyptian generals are over Saudi Arabia and Qatar's meddling, Morsi is still in jail, and the majority of Egyptians are over Islamicist politics.
The minority, however, are at risk of joining ISIS. All the disgruntled Arab Spring resistance fighters are potential ISIS candidates. All the disgruntled jihadists around the world are potential "citizens" of ISIS.
As Bishop says, ISIS is not a state, it's a state of mind. Again, reponding with military means alone will not solve the problem. The region needs to get together to address this problem. ISIS is as much a security issue within other Arab states as it's an issue in Iraq and Syria.
Iraq has been turned into failed state. While the Coalition caused this problem, the Coalition cannot fix the problem. This is a regional Middle Eastern issue, best solved by a regional partnership. Any military campaign by a Western "coalition of the willing" will only make the enemy stronger and more determined.
It is a complex problem karmal but there is always the place for a well thought out solution.
Say i owned a big patch of desert in the NT (not dissimilar to the middle east) and i had troublesome rogue brumbies getting in amongst my herd of fine quarterhorses. What to do?
a multi pronged approach.
helicopter shooting to reduce numbers (this would be the equivalent of the drone).
trying to pick off the brumby stallions and leave the herds of mares with a quarterhorse stallion, slowly breeding out the brumby traits.
so we could send settlers in to intermarry and reduce the ISIS angry arab gene.  perhaps muslims from a peaceful part of the world. Malaysian muslim men may be the equivalent of quarterhorses in this scenario.
we could make the environment bad for the brumbies, poison waterholes, reduce fodder.  starve them out.  this shouldn't be that difficult in the desert.
we have to prevent the brumbies spreading.  good fences make good neighbours and the fence between Syria and Iraq seems in need of urgent repair.  the jews have a better idea of fence building.
trapping,  surely we can just lay a million mines around the ISIS encampments and leave them to it.
there are many many options.
some, can be undoubtedly be caught and re educated to become fine riding hacks.
we shouldn't just look at a problem and walk away. problems should be assaulted head on with every ounce of vigour we can muster. the longer you let a feral problem exist, the harder it is to deal with down the track
I don't think anyone's saying we should. The issue is how to solve the problem, and who.
If we're looking at a military solution, you need boots on the ground. Air strikes are only a start - you can't finish a job with air strikes.
The boots on the ground need to be locals. If Uncle and Mother go in, you'll create a front for global jihad. If Uncle and Mother go in, they'll never get out.
The locals need to agree on a strategy - this is where diplomacy comes in. The days of Uncle picking sides and playing them against each other has twisted US foreign policy into knots. Now, Uncle doesn't know whether he supports Assad in Syria, or the resistance. Uncle doesn't know whether he supports another corrupt Shi'ite regime in Iraq, or someone else (and there is no one else). In all the other countries Uncle's meddled in - Afghanistan, Egypt, Palestine - Uncle chops and changes teams like an inept coach.
Remember, the US supports the most fundamentalist state in the world: Saudi Arabia. The UK supported the most dangerous terrorist leader in the world at the time: Ghadafi. It wasn't a corrupt Arab state that released the Lockerby bombers, it was Mother England. It wasn't the Arab states who drew Ghadafi into a warm embrace, it was the UK and Europe.
Since the end of the Cold War, Western intervention in the Middle East has been a spectacular failure. Hearing Obama say that he doesn't have a plan for Iraq and Syria is such refreshing honesty. In Rumsfeld terminology, this is a known-unknown. Backing leaders like Saddam and Ghadafi et al, and then throwing them away when they turn on you is a recipe for disaster.
As the source of much of the world's energy, the Middle East needs to be secure. How you secure it, and who you back, is pivotal. Obama was elected with a mandate to withdraw US forces from Iraq, not send them back in. I understand that you have to face problems when they happen, but you need to do this with brains, not brawn.
The Middle East is in the situation it is today thanks to the Western support for dictatorships and direct military involvement. The Middle East is in this situation because very few Arab states have made the transition to popularly elected governments. The Middle East is still a collection of tribes and tribal allegiances, with very few stable republics. Rather than fostering and strengthening local systems of governance and popular representation, Western intervention has merely backed tribes, trained their armies and security forces, and let them do their job of supressing their populations rather than including them. The most recent example of this is the al Malaki government in Iraq, backed all the way by Uncle.
If you ask me, it's time the Middle East started to solve its own problems, and it's time we started to look for alternative sources of energy.
Yes, the Middle East probably should just be left to its own devices.Declare it a national park, let the law if the jungle prevail and , as the greens say, lock the gate
As our tall glass of water PM, Mr Abbott, put it, it's baddies versus baddies. We can't drop bombs on the entire population of Syria and Iraq. Someone needs to be left standing to run the shop.
Particularly Iraq - it's an oil state.
Air strikes are good at one thing: making enemies of populations. The bombing of Vietnam - more TNT used than WWII - did fck all. The bombing of Cambodia led to the rise of Pol Pot.
Mind you, the bombing of Serbia did lead to the fall of Milosevic, but his government was not an insurgency. What's happening in Syria and Iraq right now is not conventional war. It's guerrilla war, and for this you need an entirely different approach to knee-jerk displays of force.
The Maoist slogan for guerrilla war was the weak overcoming the strong. In guerrilla war, mobile and lightweight militias have the ability to turn the bloated weight of the enemy against itself. local resistance forces have on their side is time. The US has to pull out eventually, and the administrations it leaves behind are usually weak and unpopular. A newly-established regime is only as strong as its army. US trained troops in both Iraq and Afghanistan have taken their skills and their weapons and joined the other side.
A conventional show of force will not destroy ISIS. This time, the West needs diplomacy to get Arab leaders on side. Arabs themselves have not taken to fondly to militant jihadists. Al Qaida was despised by the majority of Iraqis, just as Egyptians turned against the fundamentalist leadership of Morsi. It is not an axiom that, given the opportunity, Arabs will elect Islamicist leaders and call for Sharia law.
It is far more likely that bombing Iraq and Syria to Kingdom Come will unite them against the West. If led well, bombings unify populations, as wartime England showed.
The world could take a leaf out of Mao's book - the weak shall overcome the strong.
If the Cold War taught us anything, it is this. Top-down hierarchies and bloated state buraucracies are inefficient and unpopular. Fascism and communism failed for this very reason, just as we failed in Vietnam.
I think the current option of supplying  the enemies of ISIS with logistical and air support. Without an Air Force ISIS  is f.....d, that is a dead set certainty. Unlike Vietnam they don't have tunnel systems to evade the might of air power.
That sounds like a call to halt Middle Eastern/Muslim immigration until they grow up and sort out their pathologies and join the modern world.
With the US becoming dependent on nothing more sinister than Canada, the Middle East is fast becoming China's problem.  They know it and so they are ready to tango with Russia. (that'll be an interesting thing to behold - two dishonest, corrupt swindlers trying to outwit each other). Once the Arab oil become economically marginal, they will be like Africa - sad but irrelevant.
Didn't think it was in you, PB, to be a 'realpolitiker'. Well done.
You were warned in 2003. Back then, you were a foreign policy idealist, quoting erstwhile articles from the Wilsonian Institute. Remember?
Indeed. I, like millions o:f others, gave them the benefit of universalism, of common, shared humanity going beyond religion or ideology.
Big fvkn mistake.
No shared humanity, no shared values, no universalist common ground. 1400 years of struggle is right, post-modern bromides of post-secular wisdom is balls.Not going to give them the benefit the second time. Nobody is. (Except Brain, of course, but he will spinelessly excuse anything as long as it is 'other' - he is an ethical tourist of the worst kind, will praise every misery he doesn't have to live in.)
But not contractors, eh? Uncle cleaned up on all those Iraqi utilities - not to mention Pizza Hut and Subway. Even the company that took down that Saddam statue sent Uncle a bill for a few million.
Money for jam, no?
Please, old chap, don't be so hard on yourself. You gave those Iraqis the benefit of submitting to the shared humanity of carpet bombing. No one can say you didn't extend yourself. You've given so much love to these people - no doubt the influence of your Lutheran saviour.
how does that change anything to you?  conspiracy to commit serious crime with the ability to do so is generally treated and punished just below the level of those who actually committed the offences.
what he means is... they were probably playing monopoly and they got carried away by buying bombs instead of hotels.....
and unless they really do blow something up.. the good lefties will always give them the benefit of the doubt..because they know all bad guys are righties.. and anyone that votes labor is a good guy..
and of course these guys voted labor...you can betcha
It's very convenient for the government to publicise people being charged with "buying bombs".   Don't you think?
Be alert, but not alarmed
Next, they will be throwing their children overboard.
nah we spent 6 years watching  the GREENS WAY of doing it ....smashing them on rocks.... or watching them swallow the ocean....
thats the greens way isnt it?..
and now its only the Jews we have to fear.. muslims are all good..everyone knows that...
its the GREENS WAY
Then you will have to admit to the blood of over 1,000,000,000 civilian deaths  on your hands because of your side's warmongering and illegal invasions.
Taking responsibility ... man or mouse cods?
Who killed a million civilians??
Political policies ... like the policy of the howard government to invade Iraqi illegally.
You shouldn't be making up figures .
How many civilians died then?
Well I looked it up and you put up a trillion which is more than the population of the earth. So going by your figures John Howards part in the invasion of Iraq killed the entire population of planet . OH NO, IM DEAD
hilarious.. cannot tell the difference between a war when both sides are armed and ready..
to helping people with money, pay criminals like  people smugglers to smuggle them into a foreign country..... in the hope we will look after them for life..
and this idiot cant tell the difference..
perish the thought a greeny would take responsibility for opening our borders..and being the direct cause of these people drowning..
So you are a hypocrite.
It was the right's policies that caused some of the push factors for refugees to flee war zones and so take risks to reach security.
Most refugees are fleeing wars that are nothing to do with Australia.
So when abbott gives the go ahead for young australians to head into the middle east and spill their blood, Australia will not be responsible for the consequences?
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Palestine, Somalia, Iran all have nothing to do with Australia's foreign policy. Most of the Afghan's were fleeing the Taliban because they were minorities so that has nothing to do with Australia either.
So Australia has no foreign policy now. Australia isn't interacting in the wider world ... we are now an isolated island aye !
You said that our refugee problem was because of our foreign policies. These countries refugees have been rocking up and Australia hasn't been involved in a war with these countries.
yes, i think thats fair.they have shown loyalty to aussies and we should repay the courtesy
Let's not bring out the violins and the hankies, okay?
It wasn't 'loyalty' ~ it was a job that paid well and gave them a few perks not enjoyed by others.
If these interpreters are 'at risk', then it's proof that nothing has been achieved in the 12 years that Western forces have been there, and the deaths of hundreds of Western soldiers, and the umpteen billions poured into the country to make it safe for people like these interpreters.
The whole thing has been a farce, and the reason we're bringing these 'interpreters' over here is because nobody is under any illusions that the Taliban won't be back in control of the country ~ stronger than ever.
That is the reason the interpreters are being taken out of the place ~ for the very same reason we took the interpreters out of Vietnam ~ we lost the war and their lives were therefore very much at risk.
Strap in your seat belts Lefties. I believe Tony Abbott is about to announce that R.A.A.F.. Fighter Jets are about to be deployed to Iraq to assist the U.S.A.  in attacking ISIS Forces.
Bill Shorten today in Parliament virtually gave his imprimatur with a 'soft question' to Abbott about how Australia will react to the ongoing ISIS genocide in Iraq.
If this happens it will only add fuel to the would be 'Home Grown Terrorists' to carry out reprisal actions against the Australian Government.
The stakes are being raised. And if we were America we would be going to Defcon 4 if the jets are deployed.
PS In regard to my comments about Hitler's Storm Troopers, I am in no way minimising what butchers they were. However the rapidity and callousness of ISIS is breathtaking. I think it's been a long time since we seen heads being cut off with gay abandon by the butchers who claim to represent Islam. (They don't Mohammed the Prophet never preached this butchery).
Abbott said that ISIS is committing Genocide and I guess unlike the impotent United Nations, he is prepared to stand up and be counted. I respect that.
The federal government will have enhanced powers to suspend passports at short notice to stem the flow of young Australians joining the Islamist rebellions in Syria and Iraq, under legislation expected to be put to Parliament shortly.
The reforms, which have strong support in the counter-terrorism community and from government, will plug a security gap at Australia’s borders that is being exploited by scores of would-be jihadists.
Counter-terrorism sources have said the measure would see passports suspended for 48 hours, and possibly for up to a week, if a person was suspected of planning to travel to Syria, Iraq and other “hot spots”.
The interim suspension - which could apply to both Australian and foreign passports - will allow ASIO to undertake a more thorough security assessment, leading to a possible permanent cancellation of the passport.
Advertisement In addition, counter-terrorism authorities will encourage family members, respected community members and clerics to counsel the traveller on mainstream Islamic values while their passport is suspended.
The aim is twofold - to dissuade the young person from travelling and, more broadly, begin a program of counter-radicalisation, especially if the passport ends up permanently cancelled.
“We don’t want to deal with people who are planning an attack in Australia because we have cancelled their passport,” said one security source.
The vast bulk of Australians travelling to the Syria and Iraq conflict are under the age of 25. For example, Adam Dahman - the Melbourne man who became a suicide bomber in Iraq - was just 17 years old when he left Australia.
Attorney-General George Brandis said on the weekend that “wicked and evil” terrorist recruiters “prey upon vulnerable young men - they are almost always young men”.
“They are encouraged to believe a particularly radical form of Islamic ideology. They are encouraged to believe there is some kind of romance in self-destruction,” he said.
“We are determined to do everything we can to thwart them.”
Revoking passports is a key strategy to stop the exodus of Australians to the Middle East conflict zones, amid concerns that jihadists who return to Australia could launch terrorist attacks here.
More than 50 passports have been cancelled due to adverse security assessments in the past two years.
More people are being stopped, but many escape the dragnet and the number of Australians fighting in the Middle East is growing. Some 150 Australians are believed to be in Syria and Iraq assisting Islamists, with about 60 reckoned to be frontline fighters.
Under the changes, ASIO, and possibly the Australian Federal Police, would have the power to make a rapid fire call to the Minister for Foreign Affairs to temporarily revoke a passport, even if ASIO has not completed a security assessment on the individual.
Under the current regime, a full assessment from ASIO must be considered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs before a passport is cancelled, generally for an unlimited duration.
The young age of most of those heading to Syria and Iraq means ASIO and other agencies often have scant information about them, and sometimes have none.
In a review of counter-terrorism laws earlier this year, the independent national security legislation monitor Bret Walker SC said the introduction of interim passport suspensions “would strengthen ASIO’s operational agility”.
“This would include circumstances where ASIO becomes aware at short notice of security dimensions to an individual’s imminent travel or receive no intelligence warning that an individual of security concern intends to travel overseas.”
The changes are part of a suite of measures, which include giving the authorities the explicit power to revoke a passport if the person is suspected of financing terrorism, and of joining a foreign conflict, not just for terrorism reasons.
The government is also weighing whether it can revoke the Australian passports of dual nationals fighting abroad, although this is yet to be finalised and is proving problematic to implement given Australia’s obligations under UN treaties.
The passport reforms are expected to be presented to Parliament when it resumes in late August and September.
The UK raised its alert level from substantial to severe in August. Sometimes a terrorist alert is just a terrorist alert, PB. There are western jihad is, you know. 60, 31, 57, 93, 42 - how many are you comfortable with?
Operation Demetrius was a British Army operation in Northern Ireland on 9–10 August 1971, during the Troubles. It involved the mass arrest and internment (without trial) of 342 people suspected of being involved with Irish republican paramilitaries (the Provisional IRA and Official IRA), which were waging campaigns against the state. It was proposed by the Northern Ireland Government and approved by the British Government. Armed soldiers launched dawn raids throughout Northern Ireland, sparking four days of violence in which 20 civilians, two Provisional IRA members and two British soldiers were killed. Due mainly to faulty intelligence, many of those arrested were Catholics or Irish nationalists who had no links with republican paramilitaries. Loyalist paramilitaries were also carrying out acts of violence, which were mainly directed against the Catholic and Irish nationalist community, but no loyalists were included in the sweep.[1]
Problem Cods, with surveillance and I harken to my Police days, it is incredibly labour intensive and that is just one target. The human resources that go into 24/7 surveillance of 1 individual are substantial. Try doing that with 60 of them, plus whomever they are training up, which they will be even, as I type this missive.
We need to kick them out of the Country.
No - try  internment without trial.
Be interesting trying to get that through both houses of Parliament and then past the High Court, Bobby.
Of course, it didn't do very well when it was tried in Northern Ireland.  It's generally recognised as actually worsening the situation when it was used there and prolonging and deepening resentment against British rule as it was used by the Protestants to further oppress the Catholics, being targeted specifically against them.
Be interesting watching a Government try and get that past the High Court for those born here, with native born Australian citizenship.  Where you going to deport them to in that case, Red?
But we don't have the resources to watch all the muzzies.
We don't have to watch them all, as not all are involved in any Terrorist activity.  Indeed, to even suggest they should all should be "watched", Bobby displays a level of bigotry towards them.
FD had it right when he said,Quote:
What we need to do is stop alienating the entire muslim community and work with them towards the goals we have in common. The more we tar them all with the same brush, the more we push weaker individuals towards extremism.
All you're going to do with Internment Without Trial is further alienate them, just as the Catholics were in Northern Ireland and we know how well that worked out, now don't we?
Nobody is alienating Muslims but Muslims themselves. It's their own ideology and their adherence to it that makes them keen to alienate themselves from the infidels. They cultivate  a massive victimhood complex but they deliberately segregating themselves. And numpties like Brain are eager to excuse them from all the mind-wrought prison they inhabit and refuse to be free from.
The ones that are not fussed about Islam are not alienated. They are not demonstrating their opposition to their society in speech, manner, clothes etc.
It's their own ideology and their adherence to it that makes them keen to alienate themselves from the infidels. They cultivate  a massive victimhood complex but they deliberately segregating themselves. And numpties like Brain are eager to excuse them from all the mind-wrought prison they inhabit and refuse to be free from.
So, there is a tiny minority then, who are the problem, Soren?
Doesn't this rather contradict all your other pronouncements on Muslims which have made no effort to differentiate between them and the majority of moderate Muslims?
Just a clarification Karnal, when I said that's how Vietnam started out; I was referring to how the U.S. and Australia and allies got involved in the conflict.
I understood what you meant, Red. Vietnam, Korea and the Berlin Wall were the exceptions in the Cold War as they were actual wars (or, in the case of Berlin, very nearly a nuclear war).
The rest of the world went with either superpower without, in most cases, an actual fight. Like other colonies, Middle Eastern states went straight from their former colonial masters to Uncle or Russia.
The Arab Spring was the natural consequence of the end of the Cold War. Without well-organised puppet governments in countries like Egypt, Lybia and Tunisia, their populations voted with their own feet (or weapons). Either way, they got to vote for the first time.
Trying to understand local civil wars and conflicts without an understanding of the bigger picture will lead to problems. Likewise, describing local conflicts solely in reference to universal signifiers like the Domino Theory or the Clash of Civilizations is equally flawed.
Well Karnal, if 60 well trained Jihadists infiltrated my Country, people have been trained keenly in the art of terrorism, I would be scared sh.tless of what trouble they would cook up once they got back home from their 'big adventure'. The fact is they have.
Why the hell they let those bastards back into Australia I don't know. Perhaps the laws hadn't been passed that allowed the Government to prevent them from re-entering Australia.
But re-enter they have and everything I have ever been trained for in the military and even the Police for that matter has a big red warning light going off.
Anyone who doesn't think that these Jihadists roaming around here, with their Jihadists masters calling the moves, are not a threat is not living in the real world.
The A.S.I.O. boss had every right to raise the threat level.
What has happened is like letting 60 murderers back into the Country and setting them free. Unbelievable madness in letting them back in, now the Country faces a real and serious threat from them.
PS I suppose the terrorist bombings in London were bullsh.too Karnal, that is of course, until they happened. 9/11 a blush.t exercise too. After all it couldn't happen in America...that is until it did.
They need to round them up & imprison them - not spend money watching them.
can on ly imagine what lefties would do with that one???. ..and as for the anything to win a vote mob... wishy washy and the greens  they would march on the prisons and demand release..
Do you have some sort of evidence that IS "carry out wholesale genocide on their own faith"?
From the media reports I have read, there were a few executions of Iraqi and Syrian soldiers who they are fighting, but not the "genocide" that you talk of.
By the way if you want to know about genocide I suggest you start by looking at the actions of Western nations.
The United States of Genocide: Putting the US on Trial for Genocide Against the Peoples of Korea, Laos, Viet Nam, Cambodia, Iraq, and Elsewhere
The United States of America was built on a foundation of genocide against the Indigenous peoples of North America. In fact, all successful settler colonial societies are founded in genocide. The process is one of dispossession – the erasure of one group identity and the imposition of another on the people and/or on the land. But genocide is not merely the foundation of the US nation state, it is also the foundation of the US empire. The US habit of genocide has not died, but has transformed. The US has become a serial perpetrator of genocide with the blood of many millions of innocents spilled in pursuit of imperial hegemony.
There is a fight going on for the very meaning of the term “genocide”. Western powers assert their right to accuse enemies of committing genocide using the broadest possible definitions whilst also touting a twisted undefined sense of “genocide” which can never, ever be applied to their own actions...
Every major military action by the US since World War II has first and foremost been an act of genocide. I do not state this as a moral condemnation. If I were seeking to condemn I would try to convey the enormous scale of suffering, death, loss and misery caused by US mass violence. My purpose instead is to correct a terrible misconception of US actions – their nature, their meaning and their strategic utility. This understanding which I am trying to convey is a very dangerous notion with an inescapable moral dimension because the US has always maintained that the suffering, death and destruction it causes are incidental to military purposes – they are instances of “collateral damage”. But, with all due respect to the fact that US personnel may face real dangers, these are not real wars. These are genocides and it is the military aspect that is incidental. In fact, it is straining credulity to continue believing in a string of military defeats being sustained by the most powerful military in the history of the world at the hands of impoverished Third World combatants. The US hasn’t really been defeated in any real sense. They committed genocide in Indochina, increasing the level of killing as much as possible right through to the clearly foreseen inevitable conclusion which was a cessation of direct mass violence, not a defeat. The US signed a peace agreement which they completely ignored. The Vietnamese did not occupy US territory and force the US to disarm and pay crippling reparations.
There is no question that the US has committed actions which fit the description of genocide. Genocide does not mean the successful extermination of a defined group (there is no such thing as “attempted genocide”). It was never conceived that way, but rather as any systematic attack on “a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such.” Those who deny US genocides usually only deny that there is any intent to commit genocide. The UN definition of genocide (recognised by 142 states) is:
any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such:
The United States of America was built on a foundation of genocide ...
Every major military action by the US since World War II has first and foremost been an act of genocide. I do not state this as a moral condemnation. If I were seeking to condemn I would try to convey the enormous scale of suffering, death, loss and misery caused by US mass violence.
ISIS fighters, who have already driven out Christians from their ancestral homes in northern Iraq – including Zumar — have been especially targeting the Yazidis. The United Nations has called the situation in Shingal and other parts of Nineveh province “a humanitarian disaster.” The Yazidis are the latest victims of the brutal advance by the Islamic State, formerly the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, whose Sunni Muslim fighters have been targeting Iraq’s Christians and other minority groups, as well as Shiite Muslims.
ISIS has captured the primarily Yazidi towns of Sinjar and Zumar, killing nearly 2,000 and forcing 200,000 to flee into the nearby mountains without food and water. More than 50 children have died from dehydration since August and hundreds more children and elderly are at risk. Other crimes against humanity are also being committed by ISIS, include beheadings, rapes, and selling minority children and women into slavery, according to a member of Iraq’s Parliament, lawmaker Vian Dakhil.  A UN official has called the ISIS actions “genocide.”
Originating from a splinter group of Al-Qaeda, ISIS, has grown into a complex threat to peace and security in Iraq and Syria as well as across borders into other Middle Eastern countries such as Lebanon. ISIS sees itself as the ultimate authority over all Muslims as it attempts to establish a new Muslim Caliphate stretching across all Muslim countries in the Middle East.
ISIS has also persecuted religious minorities in Iraq’s Nineveh province, including orders to non-Muslims to convert to Islam, pay a special tax, and either leave or face execution. Systematic abductions, killings, rapes, and destruction of property owned by non-Muslims have become common in ISIS controlled areas.
It is estimated that since the beginning of 2014, 1.2 Million Iraqis have been displaced.
Many Yasidis currently are trapped in the mountains without food and water. ISIS is not only directly killing them, but is preventing them from getting food and water.  This is genocide under Article 2 (a) (b) and (c) of the Genocide Convention.
Genocide Watch recommends that:
Big difference between Nam and ISIS, is that the North Vietnamese didn't carry out wholesale genocide on their own faith. Mixed bag of lollies this outfit.
that may well be..
but I have asked this before....what is wrong with dividing a country like Vietnam North and South.??.
An interesting question, dear. What’s wrong with it?
Nothing except that it’s a Cold War solution when the bi-lateral powers reached a stalemate - Korea, Germany, Vietnam.
Nation states are not "people with different views". If you believe conservative thinkers like Edmund Burke, a nation is organic, like a life form. Dividing up a nation, for Burke, would be akin to Solomon’s test to cut a baby in half to give to two conflicting sets of parents.
You can’t divide states in a post-Cold War world, because this solution required each state to be defended by two balanced super-powers. North Korea is left standing because it’s backed by China.
In a post-Cold War world, it is far more likely that states would split into even smaller atoms, not unlike Yugoslavia.
Oh, I’d just be comfortable with an explanation, old chap. I’m easily pleased.
It’s not as if we’re at war or anything. Would you prefer a decent war, dear boy?
it only takes one car one bomb one jihadist and BINGO hundreds dead or wounded.
they dont really care who or where...
we are dealing with mad people like psychos they have NO conscience whatever ..
they enjoy what they do...
in some case they are never satisfied killing is what their life is about...
yes they too risk death... but in this case they actually look forward to that knowing full well someone will step into their place once they have left for paradise..where they will meet Muhammad and pick up the 70 virgins..
If the majority of Muslims were against IS and all the other Islamic terrorist organisation - these organisations would not exist. The Majority of Muslims would make sure, through 'direct action' that they have no financial and community support.
But they exist. The vast majority of Muslims are thinking it's all inshallah as far as Islamists are concerned. Islam is a slothful, fatalistic religion and the 'vas majority' will sit on their hands, waiting how it all turns out.
The 'vast majority' of Muslims are lazy (like most of the rest of us) and cowardly (ditto).
I agree bobby but we need to send a message that the next strike is "punishment"WE need to set the agenda.
so we identify as many ISIS targets as possible and wait for the next beheading (shouldn't be long).then we launch Blitzkreig on every target that can be identified and we publish it on the web.
Arab youth respect strength and will radiate to strength.
having citizens beheaded makes us look like pussies.
it is important the strikes are devastating, immediate and well publicised.
the greens should hang their heads in shame for not being 100 % behind this initiative.
they are true quislings and their position weakens our position, makes arab youth more likely to seek the comfort of the strong , and sends a message to ISIS to keep going.
ISIS wont keep going for long. I hear they have 40 Turkish hostages that they are threatening to behead if turkey tries to stop the flow of munitions to ISIS.when the first turk is on youtube, the local turks aided by our military will hunt these clowns down.
The important thing is we publicise their defeat and humiliate them
then they will see their god is no match for US armaments.
Green senators in OZ should be interned at Cowra for the duration of the fight. hopefully they will try to escape and all end up on the train line as the express comes thru
There is something happening in Iraq called a Genocide. ISIS is butchering anyone Moslem or Christian that will not adhere to their idea of being as 'proper' Muslim. They have already carried out a genocide on a large scale.
You are correct in stating that we the West had a lot to do with ISIS starting because the Middle East was left in a power vacuum after the Iraqi War.
Because we the West are in a very big way responsible for the circumstances that allowed ISIS to grow, we need to go and fix up the genetic mutation that is ISIS.
If we don't ISIS could very well grow into some sort of monolith whose base values, are butchery on a grand scale.
Therefore we need to go and smash ISIS into Kingdom Come, the last thing we need or the Muslims for that matter is a modern day version of the Nazis.
This time we shouldn't leave until stability of a reasonable form is entrenched. Not an easy job with the Middle East I admit but ISIS simply can't be allowed to flourish. If we do, eventually it will be at our peril.
This is just a mindless headline in the style the Tele have been parroting of late. Last Friday's was SEND THEM ALL TO HELL.
It's not a plan.
Fighting ISIS on home ground will also send many of our own to Kingdom Come. That's what wars tend to do.
We all have the objective of sending ISIS to Kingdom Come - even ISIS. The question is how to do that.
The issue of genocide is an entirely different issue. It's possible for us to protect local civilians or arm them to protect themselves, but this is not sustainable long-term. Ultimately, this is a job best done by local forces who are able to get in quick. The Kurds and Turks have already acted to do this. The Iraqis - a government and army we suported, trained and set up - have proven to be incapable of doing this.
Sending ISIS to Kingdom Come is a nice-sounding objective, but it's not actually possible to do, and it's not what we're in there to do.
What we are in there to do, beyond assisting Iraq to defend its own borders better, is questionable.
This, of course, is just how we got into Vietnam - as everybody knows.
Last time I checked we were sending Fighter Jets with logistical support for them,. I also believe elements of S.A.S. are involved.
No, it's not what the Government is saying but it's what most Australians know. That's what justifies it to me, I'm not too concerned about any other reason. Genocide is reason alone, enough to commit.
We didn't go into Vietnam to stop a genocide, bit different there.
No, according to Harold Holt, we went in to join Uncle.
Which is exactly what the government was saying last week.
The vast majority of Australians do not start wars. They either support or condemn them, based on what they hear. In both cases - the invasion of Iraq and Nam - Australians ended up condemning them. History condemns them. We lost.
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere   The ceremony of innocence is drowned;The best lack all conviction, while the worst   Are full of passionate intensity.
The IS monsters are full of passionate conviction while many in the west lack any conviction other than to remain always passive, to always cede the field, always concede defeat as an opening gambit.
Karmal and western leaders over think what is really a fairly basic set of principles.
If you have a tiger snake in your back yard and you know its there but it leaves you alone, the last thing you do is go and stir it up.So if ISIS were just frigging around in the middle east and leaving us (the west) alone,  this would be the approach.
But if said snake came up your back stairs into your house and killed one of your kids and then slinked off back to your back yard.If it killed one of your kids and then made a snake video of the killing and taunted you to do something about it, well, for f*cks sake. you do something about it.
What sort of cowardly lowlife scum doesn't protect his family from this.What sort of coward says "Oh i'm not going down the back yard, the big snakey scares me, sorry if he gets any more of you kids"
A "real" man . a "real" Australian goes down that backyard, torches the lair with 50 litres of gasoline and blasts every single f*cking snake as it emerges.Now if some carpet snakes and other "non combatants" get blasted and fried as well, Too F*cking Bad.in future the carpet snakes will learn that they should have killed the tiger snake and presented it to you as a gift to show their solidarity.
So what if the Moslems do to the French, what the Germans did to the Jews (because later, the Jews will have to fight for the 'unarmed' Moslems against the Italians) soon while China invades Russia to take back Siberia, etc, etc. It's all just a process of change, just like all the Lands were once 'one' (Pangaea) long ago, separated to acknowledge the 'differences' and will become 'One' once again.
A "piecemeal" World War III may have already begun with the current spate of crimes, massacres and destruction, Pope Francis has warned.He was speaking during a visit to Italy's largest military cemetery, where he was commemorating the centenary of World War I.
The Argentine Pope has often condemned the idea of war in God's name.
Only last month, Pope Francis said the international community would be justified in using force to stop what he called "unjust aggression" by Islamic State militants, who have killed or displaced thousands of people in Iraq and Syria, including many Christians, the BBC's David Willey reports.
In Saturday's homily, standing at the altar beneath Italy's fascist-era Redipuglia memorial - where 100,000 Italian soldiers killed during WWI are buried, 60,000 of them unnamed, the Pope paid tribute to the victims of all wars.
Karmal and western leaders over think what is really a fairly basic set of principles....
thoughts?
My thoughts are that whenever you try to simplify things with your horse behaviour or your ubermensch schtick, we're all in for a really long ride.
Correcting your simplifications takes a lot of work. I do my best, but I have the sneaky suspicion that most of it falls on deaf ears.
The situation in Iraq is so complex that even Barack Obama has come out to say that he doesn't know what to make of it all. He suffered for that one too. Fox News must have been showing him no mercy for it for the past 2 weeks. I believe Obama's polls dropped a few notches.
Being angry at a group or country or enemy is easy. Finding a way to deal with them is much harder. It's easy to write headlines like SEND THEM ALL TO HELL. It's much harder to come up with a plan to stop ISIL carrying out their atrocities, threatening the stability of the Middle East, and having a gen-u-wine rogue state in the heart of oil country.
This is not simple at all, and it will take a long, carefully coordinated plan of military and diplomatic moves to stop ISIL and prevent their spread.
Do this right, and we'll hear nothing (apart from the usual News Ltd beat-ups and chest-thumping). Do it wrong, and we'll be involved in another endless military occupation of Iraq, probably Syria, and big issues with Iran as well.
A very cautious US military talking head was on 7.30 last night. When asked how ISIS is a threat to US and Australian domestic security, he didn't have a lot to say. Basically, they're not much of a threat to us at all. When asked why ISIS has presented such a problem to the White House, he put much of it down to the cable news coverage.
In other words, the media is in large part driving the security agenda - the tail wagging the dog.
The issue that is ISIS is not simple. It's a complex array of forces, and most, I woulod say, are domestic - media coverage, poll numbers of world leaders, and the endless demands of citizens to do something - anything - before they even know what the problem is.
I don't like rules, but I do have a general principle when it comes to military involvement: defence forces are for defence. You deploy them when you're attacked, or when you're threatened with attack. You don't just send them off to wherever the current whim takes you because your polls aren't looking good or the Tele runs a front page calling to SEND THEM ALL TO HELL.
I know I'm going against the grain of Australia's entire military history (excluding the Pacific War), and arguably against the entire history of Europe - but it's just a principle. I'm also pragmatic. Australia has a role in global policing, and the best example of that, I think, was East Timor - when we wore blue berets, not US stripes, and we stayed within our own region.
Where we can help, I think, we should. Iraq clearly needs help right now. The objective, however, is not to SEND anyone TO HELL. It's to restore the peace. These two objectives are so far apart as to give you a hint of what fruits they'll bear. Asking how you improve security in Iraq gives you completely different answers to the question of how to send a shapeless ideology to hell.
Knee-jerk responses will not send them to hell. As history has shown, they'll end up taking us to hell with them.
its asking too much of people to use well thought out positions when the opponent is using such raw emotion, anger and cruelty.
ISIS brought this or are about to bring this, on themselves.Our troops probably wouldnt be too keen going up against the wiley, resourceful and brave viet cong, but i'll bet they are chomping at the bit to go up against these god-awful cowards.
I hate to break it to you, dear, but that's the whole point of having a modern, well-planned and well-trained defence force. It's why armies have what they call discipline within the ranks, with NCOs and MPs to carry it out.
The days of two tribes heading off with clubs and spears to have it out are long gone. The days of getting a posse together to hunt down the outlaws or the injuns or the niggras are long gone too.
The opponent is not using emotion at all - they're using Facebook and Youtube. The emotion is all on the front pages of the Tele, and the editors aren't very emotional either.
You are.
ISIL certainly did bring this upon themselves, but they're itching for martyrdom. If you think the best way to deal with ISIL is an eye for an eye or a head for a head, you're simply playing their game.
This is a game we can never win, and it's a game we should never want to win.
David Cameron needs to suck it up and get Britain involved on a scale of which it is capable. It is all on the line in the Middle East and the sooner Cameron stops worrying about Muslim votes and starts taking care of business the better.
We've heard him tub thumping about binging the killer of David  Haines to Justice but what about the big picture Cameron? What are you going to do about the wholesale genocide ISIS is carrying out?
Now you see Aquascoot, you are saying a lot of things that people are thinking.
If I was a 20 year old muslim in western Sydney, unemployed, pissed off at the world, looking for something to break the tedium of the modern leftard nanny state, I would find the ISIS videos very interesting.If a fat stupid female green senator started trying to love up on me and treat me like some sort of western sydeny house pet, I'd be on the next plane to Syria.The fags and elites don't understand suburban mentality (hardly surprising).The pissed off youth aren't going to listen to the greens, they aren't going to listen to their boring old farts in the mosques telling them tch tch and having a love in BBQ.they respect strength and manliness. They will side with OUR special forces when they go in and whip the asses of these yokels who are only good at beheading unarmed civilians.
SO PLEASE GREEN FAGS AND LEFTARD LOSERS, if you don't want to follow, do the next best thing and get out of the way
You've nagged the Yanks and Australians into this, and now you're working on the Poms.
And you still don't have a plan for what you want military intervention to achieve - other than more endless war.
Apart from a convenient excuse for having no details, what exactly is the big picture you want David Cameron to articulate?
Based on yesterdays doorstops with Abbott and Hockey, the Libs seem to be moving on from "defending Western values and our US alliance" to "humanitarian support".
The Libs haven't said how they will provide this support. What they have done, however, is put about 300 troops back into Iraq - with no exit strategy.
So what, exactly, do you want the western powers to achieve, Red? When should we get out of this mess - a mess we created in 2003? What objectives are we going in to achieve? What do we want to see happen?
This is a question for you, Red, based on your support for our involvement. Please feel free to respond.
ISIS wont keep going for long.
That's not what everyone from Julie Bishop to the White House are saying. ISIS WILL keep going for long, because they'll simply go back to Syria and wait us out.
That means any intervention - military or otherwise - must resolve the Syrian Civil War. But alas, no one's made a decision yet on who they want to win. Ousting Assad should be pretty easy for an Iraq-style coalition, but Russia won't support this in the UN, as they showed last time.
This can only mean one thing: another illegal invasion of Syria, which would mean Obama going back on every statement he's ever made on the invasion of Iraq, US foreign policy, and the use of the US military in general.
At present, that's impossible, which can only mean the reverse: the US will support the Assad regime oust ISIL, Al Nusra, and every other terrorist unit fighting the Syrian civil war. This solution, of course, means going back on the old Axis of Evil line. And there goes the whole idealist foreign policy agenda championed so shamelessly by the neo-cons.
We might as well support North Korea next.
You can't just fight ISIL a little bit. Boots on the ground in Iraq mean boots on the ground in Syria - and this means solving the Syrian civil war in a way that somehow saves face for Uncle.
Whatever the long-term strategy turns out to be, one thing is certain: ISIL will keep going, and we're in this one for the long haul. No matter how it pans out, everyone's going to come out with blood on their hands, and it won't be pretty.
Our F-18's are primed and waiting for the call to Iraq. Abbott has pledged 600 Australian Forces to the call to arms. Most of these will be logistical support for the fighters.
Personally I can't wait to see ISIS get caned for one reason only, to stop the genocide that is going on over there. I consider that the main reason why we need to be there.
Cods, I don't think Abbott has done a bad job with this, obviously Labor think so too because Shorten has promised bilateral support.
But the question lingers, why are they letting them back in? You wouldn't let a fox in the chicken coop.
I have explained this either in this Thread or one similar.  Constitutionally, as an Australian citizen, they have a natural right to re-enter.  We have a capacity to arrest them and put them away if they are guilty of an offence competent under Australian Law.
Aussie, I am on board with what you are saying but if the National Security is being placed in peril then the Politicians need to get off their arse and ask us to vote for a change in our Constitution so that our Country may stay safe.
These arseholes who want to go fight for ISIS....fine but don't come back. You like it so much freaking stay there,with your severed heads for company.
Great Britain has had SF in Syria and Northern Iraq for months. It has also been flying sorties out of Cyprus also for months.
Which is what Leigh Sailes put to David Johnston, Minister of Defence, on 7.30 last night.
The government's sole rationale to ISIS being an Australian regional issue is that returned fighters trained in explosives and firearms use would be an internal risk.
The logical question to this, then, is why do we need boots on the ground in Iraq and Syria?
David Johnston had no answer to this. Any returned fighter is, as the government keeps arguing, subject to Australian laws for supporting terrorism and fighting in foreign wars.
The government are currently mouthing motherhood statements and platitudes - "humanitarian", "global partnerships", "restoring international security".
But they're failing to show how their involvement will not, as the recent invasion of Iraq clearly showed, work against all these values and objectives.
It's a pretty simple question all citizens should want to know if their government is sending their country to war: why?
Yeas...we can't have our boys going to foreign places to fight, being brutalised by War, become adept at its execution and then returning here.....that'd be just awful!  I can't imagine that ever being allowed.
The answer is already there Karnal - to stop a Genocide - any additional information is irrelevant.
That's just rubbish.  People get killed in a civil war, and that is what this is.....a War within parts of the ME.....Arab -v- Arab, a civil War (like the Yanks had and there was genocide or subjugation of the other on the mind of both sides) in which we have zero national interest, or interest by Treaty and/or UN sanction.
I know its not a new line, but a close mate of mine who was (now retired) a dyed in the wool diplomat who was Australia's Rep at the UN at one time in his career today agreed with my POV, and he added....(the not new line)..."This will end in tears."
Enough of the bullsh.t. What is complex about knowing that an organisation called ISIS or ISIL or both is carrying out Genocide on a grand scale in the Middle East.
What is complex about making a decision to go and stop it?
Yes, the strategies are complex but not the decision to go and save innocent people from being butchered by a terrorist organisation.
They can only be classified as a Terrorist Organisation because they are prepared to butcher men women and children who do not adhere to their version of Islam.
Don't try and over complicate it.
The basic reason to be there is simple.
The solution, yes, not so easy but we need to go.
And among the Kurds doing their fighting against ISIS is a proscribed (in Australia) terrorist group.
The US initially supported ISIL in Syria.
What is left to say?
what is left to say is that the middle east seems to be inhabited by death adderscobrastaipansblack snakesblack mamba's rattlesnakesthe occasional harmless python.
so when uncle starts dropping ordinance, he may kill the odd python (regrettable) but he makes the world a safer place by eradicating so many deadly species.if these species would stay put in the middle east we could leave them alone but since the movie "Snakes on a Plane" has inspired them to start global roaming , we need to attack the problem at its source
However, I don't think we got it wrong in Iraq. Let's not forget Saddam Hussein was committing genocide too. Chemical attacks against the Kurds and more.
I also think that our exit strategy was shocking, premature, totally not thought out and created the climate for ISIL to grow strong and successfully attack Iraq.
I think we are morally bound to go back and stop ISIL from doing exactly what Hussein was doing and by bloody hell we had better get it right this time.
Most probably won't be that long before we will be having a little  War all of our own here.
The exposition of a terrorist plot here shows how that the Jihadist supporters have been busy little beavers and leaves one to wonder just how much activity it going on out there.
We will soon find that this is not an isolated incident and I hope to God that our Intelligence Services are right across this.
No matter how good they are, there will be incidents and blood will flow. Hope I'm dead wrong about that last comment but I feel I'm right.
I also believe that  there is considerable support amongst Moslems at large for the ISIL movement. There are 500,000 Moslems in Australia. Let's just say purely as speculation that 10% of them support ISIL. Then that would make 50,000 people out there that would like to see us infidels in the grave.
Am I stirring up things by suggesting that? No, not at all, I think I am being conservative.
Where are you getting this information from?
Who told you that there is "considerable support" among Muslims for ISIL?
It came from me as speculative figure, it doesn't mean sh.t. What does mean sh.t and deep sh.t for us is that a major terrorist plot has been uncovered. Stay tuned to your crystal wireless for there will surely be more to come in the immediate future.
Are you living on Earth Greg or the planet Krypton...I think you've had way too much Kryptonite for one day.
Your worrying about stats is puerile.
I'm going to ask you one simple question Pec.....
Do you think that Moslems out there support the Australian Christian majority or ISIL which states they want all Moslems under one flag,  the ISIL flag?
You didn't answer my questions.
Where did you pull that figure of 10% from?
I don't know where the figure is coming from but I do enjoy your "tactics".  No doubt if a source for that figure is presented you will immediately shift to saying the source is not reputable.
It is just the way you roll.
I have no idea why the forum sandalistas even when presented with evidence of grinning loons from Australia holding up heads still deny there is a problem with Islamic terrorism and it is alive within the Muslim community within Australia.
I guess after a lifetime of doing making apologies, grovelling statements of mitigation and lots of "hey look over there!" It becomes unthinking second nature.
You're right there. We backed Saddam gassing the Kurds. Uncle vetoed a UN resolution against Saddam's attacks on the Kurds on the Security Council, and Australia has a policy of supporting Uncle on the UN every step of the way.
The gassing of the Kurds did not even become an issue until Kuwait brought it up after Saddam's invasion of them. And after we went into Iraq the first time, there was a deliberate policy to leave Saddam in place. When the Iraqis themselves armed up to fight Saddam, US troops allowed them to be captured by Saddam's Republican Guard in the territories the US held.
I also believe that  there is considerable support amongst Moslems at large for the ISIL movement.
Uncle himself supported ISIL in 2012. How quickly things change. When Syrians armed to fight Assad, Uncle thought all his Christmases had come at once. Now, it seems, the policy is to leave Assad where he is - the way the US backed Saddam, and after Saddam, Gaddafi.
Well, we first backed Saddam, then not Saddam. Then not Gaddafi, then Gaddafi, then not Gaddafi again.
In Syria, it was not Assad, then tacit approval of Assad. In Iran, it's still not the Mullahs - there are still sanctions in place - but Uncle's starting to rely on Iran in his war against Sunni terrorism. In Iraq, Uncle supports the Shi'ah regime that is starting to look a bit like Saddam, only different, so it makes sense that he'll soften towards the Mullahs in Iran, who are the enemies of his enemies enemies. Confused?
How do you think local populations feel?
And how do you expect all those Australians to know which groups are listed as terrorist organizations? Many wouldn't even know which organizations they're fighting for or sending money to.
This is a problem, sure. But if you've got relatives in Syria or Iraq who's lives are being threatened by the regimes in those countries, what do you do? Do you stay calm and hope Uncle sorts it out?
Uncle doesn't even know which side he's on.
You're making a big mistake to assume that Syrian or Iraqi nationals support head-hacking extremists for the pure head-hacking extremism of it all. Syria is at war. The Islamic State is a by-product of that war. I don't know what the percentage is - 10%? 20%? 99.9%?  - but many Australians sending funds or fighting in that war are there to defend friends and family from the Assad regime. Many just want to topple that axis-of-evil villain, Bashar al Assad.
You know, like Uncle once did.
How oculd you NOT make mistakes in your analysis of the situation in Syria and Iraq? Even the Central Intelligence Agency makes mistakes. The White House, in particular, has been known to make a few mistakes itself - Saddam's mysterious WMDs, for example, have never been found. Those nuclear fuel rods disguised as pipes?
They turned out to be pipes.
And every single regime backed by Uncle in the Middle East over the past 30 years or so - ALL have been guilty of some form of genocide, violations of human rights including torture, terrorist support, or corruption on the grandest of scales. Hosni Mubarak, for example, is believed to have been one of the richest men in the world. No one knows how much still sits in those numbered Swiss bank accounts.
It seems to me that the perpetrators of the incidents you're describing - genocide, gassing, terrorism - need to be brought to justice based on one set of criteria only: which ones AREN'T backed by Uncle.
We can pick a country at random, based on whomever we like or don't like at a random point in time. Like our last invasion of Iraq, we can take out more than 200,000 civilians. We won't call it genocide, but "collateral damage". And when the boss we put in charge turns out to be as big a bastard as the last one, we can go in again - only we won't call it invasion, but "humanitarian support".
Yes Red, we got in wrong in Nam, we got in wrong in Iraq, and we will, most likely, get it wrong next time too.
What is left to say Karnal is that the U.S. if they did support ISIL got it horribly wrong.
This only heightens the onus on those that f.....d it up to go in and put things to rights.
Logic 101. If you have to identify the correlations in your analogy it's because your analogy Doesn't work!!!!!. Here's a clue. Instead of just absorbing the domestic media and then deciding that you have all the answers, Don't just stop there. Do some research, read some history about the middle east, watch some of the videos that the IS have posted on youtube (Thats what the CIA and US/Aust military are doing right now frame by frame so they can understand their enemy) not the beheading ones but the ones where they tell you what they're all about.  You don't have to agree with what they are saying but if your going to have any hope of understanding what motivates them, you will listen to what they have to say about themselves and the justifications they give for why they do what they do. I don't believe that those who are running the IS give one sh!t about religion or islam. They're just using religion to do what you and many Australian's and defiantly many American's would do if they were in IS's position. They're fighting a war to kick foreigners out of their lands and they're using religion to unify the people of the middle east so that as a unified force under one banner they can finally kick the west out of the middle east and have their lands to themselves. If you watch their video's you will see them repeat often "We are all Muslims". They want to unify all of the middle east under their one caliphate, in exactly the same way and using exactly the same ferocious methods as your right wing friends on this forum would use if the Indonesians determined and controlled the internal workings of this country and pilfered the wealth for themselves. You knew of course didn't you that the borders between Syria, Iraq, Iran turkey Lebanon Jordon, are all just fabricated lines set by France and England a few years after WW1 to suite the interests of France and England.  Lets see how many hot head Australians on this forum wouldn't be chopping off heads if the Indonesians tried the same stunt on Australia.
And how do we think were going to fix this mess that we brought on ourselves by sending in troops in Iraq in 2003.  I know lets send in troops again. What a gift you are giving to the IS cause. What has history shown us over and over and over again about how you unify a people under one cause.  I know, you invade them.  But hey aqua, has just finished his morning intake of the Daily Telegraph and now he has all the answers.  Just tend to your horses mate and try not to get in the way.
youre a smart man K.you just need a bit of street sense and a good dose of pragmatism.just because you are smart and thoughtful and considered and non-emotional, don't make the mistake of thinking the rest of society think that way.the days of getting a posse together are indeed still with us.
when some looney lone wolf ISIS wannabe beheads some random in martin place,  that posse will torch every mosque they can lay their hands on.I understand people K.  they aren't half as civilised as you think . watch a few teenage boys playing grand theft auto some time, dear
So what you're saying is that we should go into Iraq again because Australians have got themselves into a tizz about stuff they saw in the media.
Oh - and because of the risk that someone might get beheaded in Martin Place.
Pec can't answer the question because the answer is GLARINGLY OBVIOUS.
Of course Muslim sentiment will be with ISIS.
Muslim sentiment goes with a range of groups. ISIL is just one military organization with global networks and alliances. There are dozens of others, all with different views on terrorism, Islamic states, fighting in foreign wars, waging military jihad on the home front, etc, etc, etc.
ISIL are on the extreme end of the spectrum. Al Nusra are also up there, but have a different take on the global struggle. Here's what Sidney Jones, Director of the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, has to say about these groups in Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim country, on Lateline last night:
SIDNEY JONES: Basically, all of those people who are committed to jihad but believe that it's counterproductive to wage jihad inside Indonesia are with the al-Nusra Front, and that includes the Jemaah Islamiyah and some other groups that have renounced violence for a long time in Indonesia now. All of the groups that are still committed to terrorist attacks inside Indonesia are aligned with ISIS, so that's how it breaks down.
And here's what she has to say about the popularity of these groups in Indonesia:
SIDNEY JONES: ...it's also worth noting I have never seen such basic grassroots backlash to ISIS as I've seen in Indonesia now. Communities and mosques and Muslim groups and individuals are using social media, which has been used to recruit ISIS members, to also fight back and that's good thing.
Greg, my 10% I plucked out of the air. Pure speculation, now just where did you get your little teensy weensy sample from Greg.
Did you do a straw poll on North Sydney station?
do numbers really matter.... if you were on a train with 1000 aussies on it and one muslim but that muslim had a bomb strapped to him..... would it really matter if he was the only extreme muslim in this country????..would we look at the crime and say .. oh well it could have been worse???...the mere thought we have ONE Muslim extremist who is contemplating beheadings walking the streets makes me shudder..
I tend to look at things as
rather than..
that would only ever happen to OTHER PEOPLE.
so 1 or a hundred.....its evil.....
and this evil appears to be catching.
True, dear, but what if that 1 Muslim wasn't really a Muslim but, say, a backpacker killer, or a Port Arthur Massacrer, or a Sydney Airport Bikie shooter, or just a big tough guy who takes out random passers-by with one king hit?
No...no, you've got to know the secret handshake. Also you have to pass a DNA test that you come from ISIL ville.The initiation..so they know you've truly come across to 'their' team, is you must be prepared to cut the balls off your boyfriend.
Do you shudder at the thought of them as well?
Get back to us when these guys organise themselves into a common creed,  complete with preachers hot for worldwide struggle agaist anyone who doesn't submit to their creed,  an international network of armed militants financed by countries governed by their belief in backpacker killing,  port arthur massacring or bikie shooting - and with increasing migration from those countries to Australia and to other wester countries. In other words,  get back to us when you have found a demographic that actually resembles the jihadis.  Until then you are just talking shite,  as usual.
I would be surprised if only 10% of muslims supported IS.  In france it is 1in 5.Many,  most would be revolted by some of their actions. But also many,  probably most would agree with their political aims:  overthrow dictators,  establish an islamic heartland, demonstratrete the possibility of a functioning islamic state,  opposition to western policies in the ME,  etc. The snag is that these political aims are impossible to acieve without violence.
They've got me. With the exception of the head-hacking and the Islamic heartland bit, I'm on board.
Allah Uakbar.
Exactly.And while Scotland can gain independence after 300 years by a simple vote, Muslims cannot achieve their political aims without bloody violence. It's worth reflecting on the difference.
You think Mother brought Scotland into the UK with a bit of a cuddle do you, old chap?
Most of those arriving by boat into Australian territory are economic migrants not genuine refugees from war zones.
An interesting claim.  On what basis do you make it?  Your evidence to support it is?
Many of those claiming to be asylum seekers, patently are ILLEGAL economic migrants and are not legitimate asylum seekers.
Many of these ppl arriving on our shores uninvited [by Australia] are moslems.
And being moslems, they clearly embrace societal values which are antithetical/incompatible with our own value system.
And worst of all....Moslems do not come to Australia to become Australians.
Moslems come to Australia to be MOSLEMS, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, and are working tirelessly to undermine Australian society and Australian institutions.
e.g.Quote:
And how do you know that, Yadda?  The Australian Government has not been processing Asylum Applications now for over 18 months.  No one knows whether they are genuine refugees or not.   What insight do you have that the Government itself lacks?
Ah, is this it?
Perhaps because the closest countries and even the intervening ones, are not signatories to the UN Convention on Refugees, Yadda?  If you claim asylum in a non-signatory country you can be punished for doing so, you can be subject to arbitary arrest and deportation and you and your family have no rights, either politically, legally or to earn a livelihood.
VERY TRUE, gp!
Dictionary;asylum = = the protection granted by a state to someone who has left their native country as a political refugee. shelter or protection from danger.
I Yadda, too, am an asylum seeker.
And i demand that the Australian government provide me withasylum [protection from fear] from the threats coming from moslems in our Australian community......because i know that all moslems, are moslems.
Dictionary;Muslim = = a follower of Islam.
And all moslems follow an ideology called ISLAM.
Because moslems, in being a moslem, are choosing to associate themselves, with a lying, deceitful philosophy/organisation [ISLAM], which encourages political and religious violence against those who do not believe as they believe.
e.g.Just look at what they [moslems] do to those who do not believe as they [moslems] believe in places like Somalia, Nigeria, Kenya, Yemen, Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, ect, etc, etc, etc, etc, etc, even the UK!!!!
Google;Almost a quarter of UK Muslims believe 7/7 was justified
Almost a quarter of UK Muslims - ADMIT - that they believe 7/7 was justified
Moslems believe that terrorising
And all moslems are wanna-be murderers.
And i demand that the Australian government provide me with asylum [protection from fear] from moslems who are walking on the streets of our Australian community.
Yadda said.....Quote:
From what i know, from my study, of ISLAM's own texts, and doctrines, i would confidently make this statement...Every good moslem in Australia [and indeed, every good moslem on the planet], by self declaring as a moslem, is self declaring a criminal intent [by our laws] against local non-moslems.Every moslem!ISLAM is in fact, a criminal compact among moslems, to wage a violent 'religious' war against ALL non-moslems ['unbelievers'].In my estimation, all good moslems do understand what their religious OBLIGATION is, to ISLAM, and to fellow moslems.Those assertions i make, may be uncomfortable to some among us, but are based in TRUTH, and the truthful tenets of 'faith' which ISLAM teaches.
All moslems are wanna-be murderers - as plain as the nose on your face.
Just look at the religious philosophysocietal philosophy which all moslems endorse and are choosing to empower!!!.....
KILLING OF NON-MUSLIMS IS LEGITIMATE"...when we say innocent people, we mean moslems.""....[not accepting ISLAM] is a crime against God.""...If you are a non-moslem, then you are guilty of not believing in God.""...as a moslem....i must have hatred towards everything which is non-ISLAM.""...[moslems] allegiance is always with the moslems, so i will never condemn a moslem for what he does.""...Britain has always been Dar al Harb [the Land of War]""...no, i could never condemn a moslem brother, i would never condemn a moslem brother. I will always stand with my moslem brother....whether he is an oppresser or the oppressed."
It seems I have an ally in former Prime Minister John Howard who said on an interview on Sunday Night last night on channel 7, that every Country in the world should anticipate terrorist events.
Do not lose sight of the fact that ISIL has called for a world wide Jihad against Western Countries and called for the Muslims to rise up against us infidels..
No, they’re calling for a brutal Feudal regime within quite specific perameters - the boundaries of the old Ottoman Empire. The Moghal Empire might be thrown in, but who’d try to take back India? You’d have to be mad. Imagine having to deal with all those Hindus.
Who knows? Maybe there are parallels with the fight against Fascism in the 1940s. The West, however, never fought Fascism per se, but Nazi Germany. Franco and Peron were left in power. We never fought an ideology, but nation states.
My prediction is that the wars of the future will not be fought against nations, but amorphous insurgencies. This requires a completely different military to what we’ve had in the past. The current defence systems in the US and Europe are still essentially Cold War in nature: NATO, nuclear defense systems, even the UN. The size and planning capacity of such a bloated military are not capable of fighting insurgencies. The US was learning in Iraq, but morale by that stage was lost. In Afghanistan, the strategy was largely to buy the local chieftans off - such a strategy can only last while you’re paying. Once you leave, you’ve lost them.
Groups like ISIL will win because they have something worth fighting for - martyrdom. Unless we can stumble across a way that works, we’ll be running from one war to the other, holding the fort for a few years, and leaving chaos in our wakes.
The proof of this is that no one wanted Uncle in Iraq and Afghanistan. Even the soldiers we were training took pot shots at us. In WWII, we were liberators. These days, there is no trust in Uncle and his friends.
Posted on: Today at 9:42amred baron wrote Today at 7:28am:It seems I have an ally in former Prime Minister John Howard who said on an interview on Sunday Night last night on channel 7, that every Country in the world should anticipate terrorist events.
And this requires a completely different way of waging war
karmal isnt that the case every 10 years or so??..nothing remains the same..the world wars almost sound fair by todays standards...as for the Geneva Conv..that the hell is that&gt;&gt;&gt;
no one wants Uncle Sam until their backjs are against the wall. at least I havent noticed anyone starving asking ISIS for help.. .. funny that...
you seem to hold the West responsible for every countries ills.. like leaving a country  in chaos...hummm ok.. but just when do you expect the owners of said country to actually stand up for themselves and be counted????????
Sth Korea and STh Vietnam seem to be holding on ok...do you think they would be better off had they been left to the communists???....
I dont know what is right or wrong anymore.. but I do get sick of hearing it is always the West that was/is wrong..
you claim this terrorism in only in the Middle East where it will stay...how can you say that after 9/11 Bali the London bombing Spain...thats doesnt sound very Middle East to me..
and I for one believe its only the beginning..because they rely on fear.. and our bloody complacency..
GA is a true dope. for some reason he hates aussies while still living here. Why don't we take up an collection and pay for his air fare to the Middle East. Anywhere will do.
Oh wow...David Icke??? How many were carried out by 'shaped shifted alien reptiles'???
Are you suggesting that the FBI figures are incorrect?
If so, can you substantiate your claim?
Yes I am suggesting they might be outdated. And no, YOU need to substantiate your claim, since your source is a conspiracy theorist (like It_is_the_light) who thinks he is the 'Son of the Godhead' and that the British Royal Family are shape-shifting Alien Reptiles...
The figures from the FBI are for specific years, so they aren't outdated (nice try though).
Really...because from the Wiki link (2001 I think) 33 out of 55 are Islamic based attacks...and I'd guess the numbers have increased since then.
