<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wannon Liberal Party branch, rural reconstruction
Description: Radio talk
Date: 21/02/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK                                Sunday, February 21 - 3HA
                                        Thursday, February 25 - 3YB

       iUtt week Federal Parliament resumed. r the Parliamentary Year 
 1971 and I resume the weekly talks in which I report direct to you in 
 Wannon in the series "Our Australia." This series is designed to give 
 you general information and provide background on current affairs as 
 they affect both Wannon and Australia.
       In this my first programme for the year, I would like to talk with 
 you about the meeting I convened of Liberal Party Branches of Wannon at 
 Hamilton....the Government's rural reconstruction scheme, and rumours in 
 the Wannon Electorate.
                          WANNON MEETING
       At Hamilton Art Gallery auditorium last week about 150 officers 
 and members of all Liberal Party Branches of Wannon Electorate attended 
 an informal meeting in which I outlined problems facing,the Government 
 today, and heard the problems of the electorate from delegates and party 
 members.
       It was a most successful meeting at which those in attendance were 
 able to.forceably put problems that concerned their Branches and I will 
 be doing all in my power to help find solutions to these problems.
       One of the problems raised was a recommendation made in a research
 study by the Australian Wool Board and Queensland University to close the 
 wool selling centre at Portland.
       I told the meeting that as I had fought hard to have the centre 
 established in the first place, so I would oppose with all my strength 
 any proposal to close the centre, which I believe is of vital importance 
 to Portland's prosperity.
       The study by the Wool Board and the University also recommended the 
 closing of wool facilities at Geelong, Ballarat, Albury and Goulburn in 
 NSW. I do not agree with the recommendations,
       In my opening address to the meeting I covered defence, national 
 service, inflationary problems and rural industries.
       I outlined Australia's role in its area of strategic interest - 
 SE Asia - in view of the modifying policies of the United. Kingdom, the 
 United States and the Soviet Union's increased activities in Australia's 
 area of interest.
       Because of changing events it has become increasingly clear that
 Australia must do more to help itself in the future, and because of this
 situation there was a need for continuing national service.2/ 

                      -2-

        The Government is well aware of the problems and arguments 
against national service. But if Australia is to have the forces it 
needs, then the Government has to make decisions to get those forces. 
The Government must do what it believes necésary for the security of 
Australia.
         On inflation, I blame in part the rapidity of wage increase 
decisions and the apparent lack of firmness shown by industry in resisting 
over-award pay claims. There was a time when employers opposed these 
claims and arbitration resolved the dealocked situation. Today, it seems 
that the attitude by employers is to accept claims for over-award payments 
then pass on the cost to the consumer in the form of increased charges 
and costs. Increased amnia wages, followed by additional costs of products, 
have helped significantly to create inflation.
         I must say something about competition, and the need for more 
of it. There are today, too many anti-competitive influences in Australian 
commerce. One of the significant elements in the present inflationary 
situation is that some businesses, because they are protected from effectual 
competition by price-fixing arrangements with those who should'be their 
competitiors, lack any incentive to resist demands for wage increases above 
award rates. To give in without demur is the easy way out. Such a business 
ti being surrounded by friendly "competitiors" can pass on the increased
cost to the consumer -
        For the past few weéks the Government has been seeking ways and 
means of saving money and curbing inflation, and discussions were held 
with industry and trade unions.
         You are aware now of what steps the Government prosposes as 
outlined by the Prime Minister in Canberra. Some of the steps taken may 
be unpalatable to a lot of you but but they are necessary for the good 
of the country at this time and had to be taken in the public interest.
        Of course Mr. Hawke's proposal for a 35-hour working week would 
add immeasurably to costs overall, for everyone. I believe that if people 
are only prepared to'work 35 hours each week for their country then they 
do not deserve the better things that this country has to offer.
                   RURAL RECONSTRUCTION
        I found'out at the Wannon Electorate meeting that many people 
only had sketchy ideas on what was being done by the Government in its 
Rural Reconstruction Scheme.
        To date, five States - NSW., Queensland, South Australia, 
Tasmania and Western Australia - have accepted a Commonwealth Government 
offer of finance for rural reconstruction.
                                              3/

~                            -3-

           It is hoped that the remaining State - Victoria - will accept 
    the Government's offer at an early date so that the reconstruction 
    prograpme can be implemenxted as quickly a s,^, pos sible.
           The Commonwealth's offer to the States had been for the provision 
    of 5100-million over four years as a loan carrying an interest rate of
    three per cent. However, after discussions with the States the 
    Commonwealth had agreed to make an alternative offer of a loan of 
    775_million at 6%, and a grant of $25-million. In both cases the 
    repayment period for the loan will be 20 years with an initial three- 
    year holiday from repayments of the principal. The States which have 
    accepted the offer have done so on the basis of the alternative offer.
           An agreement covering operations of the programme and its 
    financial arrangements is being drawn up for signature by the Commonwealth 
    and the States for approval by Federal Parliament.
           In addition to the $100-million, funds under Commonwealth 
    control amounting to about 77-million which is held ir in trust by 
    several States as a carryover from reconstruction schemes of the 1930' s, 
    and could be used for the new rural reconstruction scheme.
            The purpose of the new programme is to help primary producers 
    who-are in difficulty, and in danger of losing their properaties, but 
    who have the potential for long-term success.

                       RUMOURS IN ELECTORATE
            There have been suggestions and rumours within ALP circles 
    that I will not be standing as a candidate for Wannon in 1972, because 
    Wannon is considered by some Labor people as a marginal seat.
            Let me absolutely and without equivocation deny both these 
    rumours. I will stand and win Wannon in 1972. I can only believe that 
    the ALP is worried and that its allegations are wishful thinking on 
    their part.
            I will be squarely facing the polls at the next general election 
    in 1972.as the Member for Wannon and as your Federal representative. If 
    the ALP is not aware of this, then I believe the ALP is out of touch. I 
    believe this type of-allegation is mischievous and shows a lack of 
    confidence by the ALP.
            Since I first offered myself as a,candidate in 1955, I have 
    contested and won six Federal Elections, and won them well. This is 
    evidenced in the facts that the first three elections went to a second 
    and final count, while the last three were won by absolute majorities.
                                                     4/ 

                                               - 4-

           I won the 1955 Election with more than 7,000 votes and 67% of 
the preference votes. In 1958, I won with 10,517 votes and 91% of 
the preferences. In 1961, I increased my winning margin to 11,868 votes
and 90 of the preferences.
           Between 1955-1961, the Liberal-country Party improved its position
by 4,257 votes while the ALP lost about 1,000 votes .
           The last three elections have been won by me in Wannon with
an absolute majority in each case, against the combined efforts of the
ALP and DLP.
             As I said earlier, the rumours abroad in the electorate make it 
obvious that the ALP is concerned over its chances of achieving electorate 
success in 1972.•..and so they should be.


                                              ....oDo....

