<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth education assistance
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 14/05/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                \- o




       BROADCAST                          3HA Sunday, 14th May, 1972. 

                                          3YB Thursday, 18th May, 1972. 
                                          3LK Tuesday, loth May, 1972.




             Last week the Commonwealth Government made one of the 
       most important announcements regarding education in Australia 

       with which I have been associated.  Broadly, we unveiled a 
       five-year plan for Government and independent school building

111    assistance totalling $215 million, and a major change in our 
       method of assisting independent schools with their running costs.

             There were many reasons for it and it had involved 
       months of detailed consideration, but basically we made the 

       announcement for two reasons.

             One is, it has become most apparent that one of the 
       greatest deficiencies in education in Australia is the poor
       standard of so many Government school buildings, particularly
       in the inner suburban areas of our great cities. I personally
       inspected some of them in Melbourne last February. And the 
       second reason is the need for Australia's schools systems,
       particularly the independent schools, to be able to have some
       certainty about the extent of finance available to them. At 

       the moment, so far as Governments' contributions are concerned, 
       they live virtually from budget to budget.

             Last December the Prime Minister announced unmatched
       capital grants totalling $20 million for Government schools in

       the States over the eighteen months to June 1973. This was
       the first time such a specific allocation had been made. Now 

       we have announced that from July next year the Commonwealth


                                                              .../2

                           2.

will provide $167 million over five years in unmatched capital
grants for Government primary and secondary schools. The 
annual rate will be $31 million in the first two years, rising 
to $35 million in the three later years of the programme.
      We have provided this increase in the annual rate from 
1975 because thespecial funds we are setting aside for science 
laboratory construction will have run out by then. We know 
there will be outstanding demands for science laboratories for 
Government schools, and the Commonwealth intends to enable 
the construction of necessary science laboratories to continue 
within the framework of the new grants.
     The unmatched grants will be divided amongst the States
on the basis of school enrolments.  Over the five years, for 
instance, Victoria will receive $46.1 million, or more than a 
quarter of the total Australian allocation.
      The grants are intended to increase expenditure on 
school buildings and so we want to have an understanding 
with each State that it will maintain the present share of 
loan funds being devoted to schools construction. In other 
words, this is extra money.
      We also want 70 per cent of the funds to be used for
additional facilities rather than replacements. Otherwise, 
each State will be free to develop its own spending programme 
for the money.
      Last December the Commonwealth also announced an increase 
in per capita grants,totalling nearly $10 million, to independent 
schools to assist with their running costs.

                                3.


              We consider it vital that parents should have retained 
         for them a freedom of choice as to the kind of education they
         want for their children. At the same time we recognise 
         that the independent schools educate 22 per cent of our 
         children, and if large numbers of them were to close, the 
         burden on the Government systems would be intolerable and 
         educationally standards generally in Australia would suffer.
              Therefore over the same five-year period from July 
        aaithe Commonwealth has decided to make grants available

            $48 million to independent schools for the construction 
         of classrooms and associated facilities, and to put its per 
         capita grants for running costs from the beginning of 1973 
         on a regular and increased level related to costs in 
         Government schools.
              The capital grants will be at the rate of $9 million a 
         year for the first two years rising to $10 million for the 
         final three years, again in recognition of the fact that the 
         special funds for science laboratories will run out in 1975.
.             Independent schools in Victoria can expect $15.5 million 
         of this money, to which the Commonwealth will attach the same 
         condition as for Government schools - that at least 70 per 
         cent of the money be used for additional facilities rather 
         than for replacements.
              As for running costs for independent schools, the 
         Commonwealth has decided to recommend to each State that it 
         join with the Commonwealth in sharing equally the cost of 
         making per capita grants to independent schools at a rate 
         equivalent to 40 per cent of the cost of educating a child 
         in the Government schools.

                                                           ...14

                                    4.


               We hope all States will join with the Commonwealth in 
         this, although we will contribute our full half share of 
         20 per cent of the cost from the outset.
               To give you some idea of how much this involves, we 
         would expect that for 1973 the Australian average of the 
         combined Commonwealth and State per capita grants will be 
        about $125 per primary pupil and $210 per secondary pupil. 
        These are substantial increases, because at the moment the 
        combined Commonwealth and State grants are around. $92 per 
r       primary pupil and $119 per secondary pupil.
              We can expect all these measures to have a profound
        affect on education in our country. Here in western Victoria 
        we are already seeing the very real advantages of the $20 
        million Commonwealth grant for Government school building
        last December.   I can point to Portland Technical School 
        where progress on building has been advanced by more than
        twelve months as a result of the grant. Then there is the 
        Warrnambool Technical School which has similarly benefited.
•             With gains such as these from the now relatively modest 
        existing grant, we can get some idea of the impact the new 
        $215 million proposals will have on the Government and 
        independent schools systems, both here and throughout the 
        entire nation.

