<!--start metadata-->
Title: National Trust listing of Portland Court House
Description: radio talk
Date: 19/02/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


By the Minister for Education and Science, and MF>mber for
Wannon, Mr Malcolm Fraser

   The historic Court House building at Port Fairy is to be
preserved 'at all costs' by the National Trust of Australia
(Victoria).
   In deciding this, the Trust's Council has declared the
preservation of the building to be of national importance.
   It is pleasing indeed to see once again the result of the
Trust's work in its objective of acquiring, maintaining and managing
suitable building, objects or sites for the purpose of preserving them
for posterity.
   No doubt the new status of the Court House will add to the
interest of those who find great enjoyment and stimulation in visiting a
place like Port Fairy, which is one of our most historic towns.
   The old Court House — which still houses the Port Fairy Court and
provides some office space for the Police — was built in 1859-60 by a
Mr J. Mason, a contractor of Port Fairy.
   A report prepared for the Trust's Survey and Identific.a.tion
Committee li'cens the state of preservation and design quality to the
Portland Court House, which is also classified 'A'.
   The report says, 'Over the years the (Port Fairy) Court House
has been virtually untouched and remains a superb example of an early
court house...'
   There had been little change inside, except for the fitting of
fluorescent tubes. Furniture is, with the exception of some recent
wooden benches, all in keeping with the rest of the building and appears
to be the original.
   Visitors calling to inspect the fine quality volcanic stone
building will have plenty to see as there are 39 other buildings earmarked
under various categories of preservation by the Trust.
   The Historical Societies of Warrnambool and Port Fairy are now
organising a tour to Warrnambool and district from March 8 — 10 taking
in these areas which are some of the earliest settled parts of Victoria.
                          ..../2

            -2—

   I congratulate the Trust on this new step which will I feel sure 
contribute to the Trust's stated objective to educate the public and 
stimulate their interest in places and things which are of national 
or local importance because of educational, historic, architectural, 
traditional and other reasons. An important aim is to make these 
places readily accessible to the public.

