<!--start metadata-->
Title: A vision for Australia
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 24/01/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•                                   A VISIO1d OF AUST'RALIA.                      CI)
                                              Australia has given much to her citizens, gold,wool, 
        iron and steel, coal, grazing and farm lands and now oil and uranium. We are all 
        proud. of this island. continent. Our men have died in two great wars that we may 
        live and- enjoy our tradition of freedom and happiness. Our first loyalty is to 
        this country and the future: it promises our children for it is not enough to 
        ensure the prosperity of• our generation. Australia. must always be a land where 
        free men can live and work happily together."We mush stand on our own feet2 as
        England's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Butler? said recently . ''°4e must learn                             thus
        to do this in every way, economically and politically for oily ixxAillimmatx can 
        our future independence be guaranteed. The only Australians who cannot support
        plans to achieve this end are the cainmunists.
                                                     940 the Japanese forces crossed:. the Owen Stanleys. Men
        of the-+--045--; rove them back and saved this country from invasion. In the Last 
        twenty five years the Asian races have asserted their own nationalism against 
        influence from the Western Countries. French armed forces are in difficulties 
        in Indo-China where one million men have been fighting easele5sly sib n the~
               ,against Vi              i~ retie or~}.~,ist. fore                           T • - !..                 • _           .•c: outs 
        of Tr,finnP,7,ia while it is only on the last twelve months that the- Btitish have x 
        cleared. large areas of Malaya from Communist terrorisation.
                                               Australia is faced with a double peril from the north 
        brought about by the teaming millions in these sian lands. A thousand million 
        living am a panikin of rice a day, how much better some of them could do with 
        Australia in their hands. These peoples are learning western ways and their 
        recently aroused nationalism has been harnessed to the communist cause. Whetheror 
        not thr~s~e have absorbed the communist doctrine they are backed by the 
        might o4 Russia. Their dange& to us is very great. We have azr-eair land vast in
         size and empty of people. We cannot rely on America to defend us forever,

               2






























































































` ,,eed. our pride: as Australians would not allow it but we can only defend 
  Ni






































































































  ourselves when we have: developed and mastered the resources of our own country„ 




































































































  Then we shall be a great people free and worthy of our Australian heritage.



































































































            This danger from the north is great and urgent. 














                                    It


















































































  can only be combatted. be foresight and initiative, by planning and devehopment



































































































  that will lead to a Greater Australia, to greater happiness for more people.


































































































  Ihcpe. to. live to see forty million people in this. gmalati land fer only then




































































































  would. Australians take their true place in the maintenance of world peace. and


































































































  prosperity.




































































































            In the next few weeks I want to talk of things now happening
































































































  that will materially affect the future developuent o-f this nation..We have




































































































  inland. abattoirs in the Kimberleys from which beef is exported by air, WEE we

































































































  are experimenting with new breeds of cattle that may wdli bod-st our output



































































































  and although we have doubled and redoubled our carrying capacity in some areas



































































































  as yet we have 'only scratched the surface in pasture improvement and. stock



































































































  management. Our steel is being made into ships, aeroplanes and countless other































































































  things necessary for existence. Our best cloth id as good as any in the world.





































































































  An. this is not enough. Recently we have: discovered oil and uranium. inglish



































































































  technicians and engineers expect to have atomic energy for industry within



































































































  fifteen years. We have the uranium, we must plan to use it, not just as a dollar

































































































  export but to develop our on resources that we may defend ourselves as a



































































































  nation that our people may live in peace and happiness. With atomin energy it



































































































  may well become possible to fill our inland. lakes Oxxxxxmxttx and waterways




































































































 (permanently on whose bord.ets new communities of Australians would. glygg gggg











































































































  grow*








































        /jA til(e must have men of vision and initiative who, can forsee 














































  and plan these tirings.. It would take much research and thought to decide which 

















































  direction theac developments should first follow. These things are a chllenge to 



















































  our leaders, they are a challenge to every Australian with faith in the destiny of 








































  this continent as a place where our children and grandchrildren may grow and prosper..

               3
If we submit in the face of this challenge we may be sure that this nation 
will be changed by other races in a way that will make it impossible for our own 
traditions and way of lifeto survive. I have, faith in our people: . We shall
not fail.

