<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool marketing, education
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 7/05/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                        3 PIA
                        3 YB 7-~'
                        30(    44,7

      BROADCAST


          In all the Commonwealth Government's discussions and 
      considerations concerning the wool industry, there is one 
      objective clearly before us. That is the improvement - 
      streamlining, if you like - of our whole system of marketing. 
      Despite the encouraging upward movement in recent months in 
      the price of wool at auction, we are by no means likely to find 
      ourselves in such a strong market position again that we can 
      afford to ignore the obvious need for improving the way we get the 
•     clip to our customers and, with prices at their present level, 
      the cost for which we transport it.
            Transport costs have always been a substantial 
      feature of the economy of the wool industry in Australia, 
      remote as we are from our main markets. With this in mind, 
      it was pleasing to hear the recent announcement regarding wool 
      freight rates by the Chairman of the Australian Wool Board, 
      Sir William Gunn.
          There is no doubt that the benefits to be gained by the 
      substantial freight reductions for wool exporters negotiated 
      by the Wool Board will have an impact on the economy of the 
      entire industry. Sir William announced that there would be an 
•     eight per cent reduction in conference line freights on wool 
      ships in 1972/73, a saving of $2.2 million on current rates. 
      In the following year, 1973/74, the reduction will be four 
      per cent, a saving of $1.1 million, and for 1974/75, the rates 
      will return to their present levels.
          This means that, over the three years, there will be 
      an average saving of four per cent, a significant factor indeed 
      over a period in which costs generally are hardly likely to be 
      reduced.
          As well as these rate reductions, the conference lines 
      will offer growers for the first time a choice in the method 
      of transport. This three-tier structure is a new and interesting 
      departure from previous practice. The cheapest method,

                               ../2

                 2.

      to cost 25 per cent below present freight rates, will be a 
      'bare bones' operation, moving the wool only from the wharf to 
      storage shed in the country of destination.
          An intermediate standard service will provide a
      15 per cent reduction in the first year, 11 per cent in the 
      second and six per cent in the third. From a Western Victorian 
      point of view, it was interesting to note Sir William's
      remarks concerning the completion of a Wool Board study to see 
      which Australian ports it was cheapest for wool to be taken to 
      for shipment overseas.
          The study indicated that the most economic ports from 
•     the viewpoint of the land transport leg of the operation were 
      Portland, Newcastle, Geraldton and Albany.


          As Minister for Education and Science, I am naturally 
      aware of the growing interest in education among Australians. 
      It is therefore timely that the Liberal Party has just
      released a booklet entitled 'Education in Australia', setting out 
      the party's objectives and achievements.
          One could summarise the party's two major objectives 
      in education as equality and quality. The availability of 
      education must be increased, taking account of what people want 
•     for their children and of the growth in population.
          At the same time, the quality of education must be 
      improved to enable people to cope with rapid changes in 
      technology, to provide them with adequate occupational skills 
      so that they can share in the prosperity of our times, and to 
      enable them to understand how our community functions and to 
      contribute to its welfare.
          To achieve these two objectives, we believe we must 
      pursue at least four major courses of action. We must
      encourage a variety of educational institutions - government and 
      independent, from the pre-school to the tertiary - to provide 
      diversity in teaching methods and subjects and the broadest 
      possible range of opportunities at colleges and universities, 
      particularly beyond the capital cities. There must be freedom 
      of choice of schools for individuals and groups within the
      community.               ../3

                3.
          We must reduce inequalities of opportunity in 
      education throughout Australia by developing programmes to 
      help those with special problems to enable all children to 
      take their rightful place in the community.
          Several such programmes - assisting aboriginals and 
      teaching migrant children English - are already well established.
          Third, we must instil in all families a concern 
      for the need for education so that they can encourage their 
      children to make the most of the opportunities available. 
      This is not a financial task, for no matter how much governments 
      spend, their efforts will be badly impaired if even a few 
•     parents do not create the right atmosphere at home for their 
      children to study and progress.
          Finally, we must encourage local educational research 
      programmes, and the Commonwealth is now heavily committed 
      in this area. This is the best way of learning the facts about 
      our country's major educational needs and problems. Overseas 
      studies can help. But they are no substitute for inquiries 
      into the special circumstances in our own country so that the 
      solutions we seek to implement are based on sound analytical 
      research.
          These are basic ground rules from which the Liberal 
      Party seeks to deal with education, working in co-operation 
•     with the States, avoiding Canberra-based control yet providing 
      maximum assistance, encouragement, and where we can, expertise 
      and innovation.

