<!--start metadata-->
Title: Primary industry
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 27/02/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    TEXT OF
                      3HA Sunday 27/2/72 
    RADIO
    BROADCAST:        3YB Thursday 2/3/72 
                      3LK Tuesday 29/2/72



       In my first talk to you this year, I think it is 

    only right that I should deal with the most important single 

    area of economic activity in Western Victoria - primary 

    production.

       While it is true that the rural sector of our community 

    has not had an easy time in the last few years, I think you 

    must agree that there are encouraging signs.

       The strengthening of the wool market is undoubtedly the 

•   most significant feature to have emerged since I last spoke 

    to you before Christmas. Let us not delude ourselves. The 

    days when wool was a pound a pound have not returned and will 

    not return.

       But there are encouraging signs for the industry upon 

    which so many of us in Western Victoria rely directly and

    indirectly,     At Portland, Geelong and

    other wool selling centres across the nation the results

    have been the same - meaningful price rises.

       The Commonwealth recognised quickly that the wool

•   industry could not be allowed to founder, and its firm action

    in establishing the Australian Wool Commission and in

    introducing the deficiency payments scheme have now been

    justified by the course of events. We knew full well that if

    the wool prices had stayed at pre-Christmas levels, we would

    have faced a pay-out of more than $200 million to ensure the

    guaranteed minimum return of 36 cents a lb. We knew the

    problems confronting the wool commission in its buying role at

    sales around Australia. And we accepted the challenges.

       Of course, the money advanced to the commission to buy wool

    represents a loan in the truest sense. To city people, it may

    appear to be a grant, another subsidy. It is not. The wool stockpiled

               2.

       by the Commission will be released on to the market 
       responsibly.
          No-one can make predictions for the future, 
       just as one cannot say how low wool prices would have 
       fallen if the Government had not acted to support the 
       industry as wholeheartedly as it did. But we must all 
       be encouraged by the sales so far this year.
          However, in the primary industry sector generally, 
       I believe the future is bright. There is no doubt
•      about the future for beef - the basic world demand exists 
       despite temporary fluctuations that occur. And while no 
       long term predictions can be made regarding wheat, there 
       are encouraging prospects for exports, and this was, 
       of course, a factor in the Government's recent decision 
       on advance payments for 1972-73. That decision was based 
       on the level of quota deliveries recommended by the 
       Australian Wheat Growers' Federation - 407 million bushels. 
       The Government's confidence in the long term prospects for 
       the dairying industry was also reflected recently in the 
       announcement of the widening of the dairy products research 
       scheme to include all milk and dairy procucts.
          If all this sounds a little too rosy, I hasten to add 
       that we are most concerned with the position of country 
       people and the relatively depressed situation in which 
       some men on the land find themselves. Many of you will 
       know that for months I have sought a review of the present 
       Rural Reconstruction Scheme and I have impressed upon my 
       colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair, 
       the need for such a review.
          I have made public statements about this and have 
       taken up a very large number of individual cases with the

               3.

       Rural Finance and Settlement Commission.
          Therefore, I am very pleased to be able to tell you 
       that this week Mr Sinclair and The Treasurer, Mr Snedden, 
       will meet the State Ministers concerned with primary 
       industries in Canberra to consider suggested changes to 
       the scheme. In this financial year, 1971/72, the first 
       year of the scheme, the Commonwealth allocated $40 million 
       for rural reconstruction throughout Australia.
•         Some States, I know, believe this total amount 
       and their share of that total could be increased.
       Under the scheme, finance has been made available equally
       for farm build-up and debt reconstruction. However,
       I have been informed that most of the applications were 
       for debt reconstruction.
          These are the kind of issues that the Commonwealth 
       and State Ministers will discuss at their meeting.
       At the same time, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics 
       is conducting an inquiry into the availability of finance 
~      in the farm credit sector.
          It is clear the Commonwealth, by its policies and 
       actions, has demonstrated concern for the changing 
       circumstances in the rural industries in all areas - from 
       the point of view of exporting, producing and the general 
       employment and well-being of rural communities.
          The substantial increases in rural employment grants 
       to the States, decided at the recent Premiers' Conference, 
       demonstrate the breadth of this concern. The doubling of 
       the grants from $2.25 million to $4.5 million a month
       to the States will allow governmental and semi-governmental 
       bodies to provide the jobs which are vital to Australia's 
       rural population, keeping country families together and

                4.

       preserving the way of life so important to those of us 
       who choose not to live in Australia's capital cities.


       Goodbye for now.



•








•

