<!--start metadata-->
Title: Indonesia, Malaysia
Description: press statement
Date: 4/04/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATELIENT
        INDONESIA - MALAYSIA by MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.

                    APRIL 4th, 1965.

    Last week I spoke about the critical situation which 
is developing in south-east Asia. As Australians we have, 
however, in general been a little more concerned about the 
difficulties that have appeared in our near north.
    I visited Indonesia recently because I believe Australia 
and the Australian Parliament in particular must pay an ever 
increasing attention to the problems and difficulties that 
appear in our own part of the world. It is necessary for 
us to have some understanding of the prejudices and motivation 
of our neighbours. If we can do this we should be able to 
develop and pursue policies best suited to meet the situations 
that arise.
    Although developments in Indonesia are confusing, 
certain specific trends stand out. The P.K.I. has grown 
enormously in strength under President Soekarno, while other 
political parties have been suppressed and the army's political 
influence has been restrained.
    If these trends continue it is likely that Indonesia 
will become a communist nation and Australia will not know of 
the problems that this will create for ourselves as a neighbour 
until the event occurs. It may be, however, that a communist 
Indonesia would not be much more difficult to live beside than the 
present one because she has already done a great deal to make 
friendly relations difficult and precarious.
    Between Indonesia and Malaysia there is, in fact, a 
situation that is in many ways similar to that in south-east Asia 
itself. One country is trying to destroy another by means of 
subversion, by using its own inviolate bases to attack another 
smaller power.
    Indonesia sends over volunteers or men from regular 
army units to harass the Borneo borders of Malaysia or across the 
Straits of Malacca, to Malaya herself. This doesn't cost the 
Indonesians very much, especially when she uses volunteers of 
eight weeks training, but the security measures that have thus 
been made necessary are forcing the Malaysian Government to 
direct funds from developmental area to re-armament. Sixty 
thousand Malaysian and Commonwealth troops are tied up in 
Malaysia to meet any emergency that might arise. This is bound 
to create tension and difficulty inside Malaysia. Any people

                            —2—
  who were under attack in this manner would, in my view, become 
  impatient at some point of time with a Government that did 
  nothing more than mop up the attacks as they reached their own 
  shores, There would come a time when the people would demand
  that their Government back at the aggressors, and if the 
  Government were not prepared to do this to protect its own
  people then the confidence of the people in the Government would 
  be destroyed.
          This is the danger of confrontation so far as Malaysia 
  is concerned.. This is the reason that confrontation should not 
  be dealt with on a purely long term basis, and just as the 
  Americans hit at bases in North Vietnam which are used to supply 
  the armies of the Viet Cong in South Vietnam, so too can a strong 
  argument be made to hit at the bases which are used for training 
  those Indonesians who attack Malaysia.
          Tt is quite remarkable that Indonesia has been able to 
  conduct This confrontation in a military sense for as long as 
  she has without being branded around the world as an aggressor 
  against her Asian neighbours. This is, in fact, precisely what 
  she is,
         There are some things which are difficult to understand 
  in the world reactions to these problems whether it be in 
  Indonesia or Vietnam, In nearly every week of the year there are 
  rcperts that the police forces of some country have used tear 
  gas to quell a riot or a mob in some city and it attracts no 
  particular attention, But when tear gas is used by South Vietnam 
  in a difficult situation it is regarded with horror. The 
  circumstances of the tear gas being used were this Some Viet 
  Cong were reported to have fled into a village in which there were 
  many civilians not part of the Viet Cong. It would have been 
  possible to bomb and destroy the village by the normal and terrible 
  weapons of war, but recognising the number of innocent civilians, 
  the South Vietnamese used tear gas which left no permanent harm 
  on anyone although it is certainly most unpleasant for a short 
  time,
         When people look at the situation calmly they would 
  probably recognise, as the Singapore Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, 
  did that it was the realistic thing to do. It was certainly more 
  humane than destroying the village and the civilians alongside 
  the Viet Cong, The emotional attitude in relation to gas
  probably derives from the first war when gas was used with
  terrible and permanent results. This is understandable, but this 
  should not be allowed to distort our judgment of what happened in 
  South Vietnam.

a
                  —3—

       The story of the Viet Cong terror is rarely told. The 
  kind of person that the Viet Cong picks out for assassination 
  is a school teacher, a Government worker or anyone who represents 
  some service from the Government of South Vietnam. Through 
  the murder of teachers and the burning of school buildings the 
  Viet Cong have closed hundreds of schools in South Vietnam. Last 
  year 436 South Vietnamese hamlet chiefs were murdered by the 
  Viet Cong, while over 1,000 were captured. Nearly 1,500 civilians 
  were killed in other acts of terror and 8,400 were captured by 
  the Viet Congo Terror has been one of the standard weapons of 
  the Viet Cong and when we tend to criticise our own side for 
  being imperfect we should remember it.

