<!--start metadata-->
Title: New Guinea
Description: press statement
Date: 29/04/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•



              t= F,ESS ST ATEl LENT
              i i1iL•C OL.: 2t,.`':SIsI; :


                                                                 April 29th,1962

                                          _':L.'; GUINEA


                            Just before Easter Parliament debated the vexed New
              Guinea question.     The debate was under a cloud for two reasons. 
              Firstly, there has been a possibility that negotiations between 
              the Netherlands and Indonesia have been entering a crucial stage 
              and, secondly, these negotiations themselves have been jeopardised 
              by apparent Indonesian guerilla type action off the West New Guinea 
              coast.

                            As Australians we should understand clearly what is 
              involved, and we must also realise that we are not party
              principals to the dispute and, finally, we must realise that 
              diplomacy can only be effective if it is backed up by adequate
              forces; in other words by power.         Australians have legitimately
              had some fears in regard to this question. Many Australians 
              fought in New Guinea in the last world War and for the best part 
              of a century there have been Australians who have regarded New
              Guinea as Quite essential to our own defence.        There is thus a 
              clear emotional content in the Australian attitude and we should
              try and recognise this when we discuss it.       I think a large part 
              of Australians' fears rests in the suspicion that if the
              Indonesians obtain possession of West New Guinea they would soon 
              say that they wanted East New Guinea and this would bring us up 
              against a situation where we could do nothing but make a stand.

                            The Prime hinister made it quite clear in the debate 
              that we would fight for East New Guinea but West New Guinea is a
              different matter.     It is not our territory.  We have no right to
              it.  We recognise Dutch sovereignty but we have also said that we 
              would recognise any peaceful solution brought about by negotiation
              between the Indonesians and the Dutch.       Indeed, it would be quite
              absurd to suggest that we could do anything else.        As Australians,
              we might much prefer the Dutch to be allowed to maintain possession 
              of West New Guinea until that country can become independent for 
              the simple reason that the Dutch tenure is going to be short-lived, 
              whether we measure it in months or years and the East New Gunieans
              themselves would clearly be friendly neighbours.       However, if West 
                  Guinea does come under Indonesian domination, and there is a 
              strong possibility that it may, then there are various factors
              which we must take into account.

                            The Indonesians regard themselves as heir to the
              Dutch Empire in the part of the world to our north.   Rightly or 
              wrongly they believe that they have been cheated out of possession 
              of West New Guinea and thus the continued Dutch presence there
              disturbs them and arouses them to anger.       The Dutch presence is 
              like a thorn in their side and until the thorn is extracted, the
              sore will fester.     This does not mean to say there is no danger
              that the Indonesians will demonstrate Imperialist ambitions.        They
              may.   I would only say that there is a possibility that they will 
              not.

                            This is one of the situations in which Australia's 
              choice of foreign policy is clearly limited by our own porter. 
              àarlier in this year, the Leader of the Opposition was very nearly 
              zuggesting that we should go to war if the Indonesians attacked
              hutch New Guinea.    His statements which were widely published
             would seem to suggest this although I am very ,lad to say that before 
              the debate took. place in Canberra his Party had exerted a moderating 
             influence on him and his attitude in the debate seemed. only to confirm 
              the Government's view.
                                                                                /2.

                             - 2 -

              We are a nation of 10 million people. Indonesia has a
nation of nearly 100 million.  The United States and the United 
Kingdom are not particularly interested in preserving the Dutch 
presence in West New Guinea and most certainly would not fight to
do so.   If anyone suggested that we should ever enter a conflict 
without great Allies on our side then I would say it is a suggestion
leading to madness.   It would be the shortest possible way of 
bringing Australia's nationhood and independence to an end. If you 
say  Will we get assistance in regard to East Yew Guinea if trouble 
arises? would the United States and the United Kingdom be any 
more concerned about East than about rest New Guinea" I would say 
quite clearly "Yes."

             Ye have the ANZUS Pact which is a mutual Defence Treaty
between Australia, New Zealand and the United States.  East New 
Guinea would come within the terms of that Pact whereas West New
Guinea clearly does not. In addition, it would clearly be
possible to get more adequate support from the United Kingdom over 
any threat to East New Guinea whereas it would be quite impossible 
over West New Guinea.

             Other factors which must be taken into consideration
are these.   I think the countries of South East Asia without
exception support the Indonesian case.  This includes such countries 
as Malaysia which, as we all know, is perhaps more strongly anti-
Coi1munist than any other South East Asian country. India also
supports Indonesia's case.   We have been told often enough by the 
Opposition that the Prime Minister has offended South East Asian
susceptibilities.   If we went directly in conflict to Indonesia 
in regard to this matter we would be offending not only Indonesia
but also all South East Asia.  I do not really think Sir. Calwell 
wants us to do that although at times he has spoken as though this 
was what he had in mind.

             At the present moment there are two spheres of possible
negotiation.   The Secretary-General of the United Nations, U Thant, 
has been actively working to bring the Indonesians and the Dutch to
a round table conference.  In addition to this, the United States 
has been most active diplomatically so that a negotiated solution 
could be reached.

             Australia has a clear interest to preserve peace in
South East Asia.  If any conflict did begin, there is always the 
possibility that it could spread and, further and there is the fact 
that any open conflict would give the Chinese or the Russians an 
excuse to get their own equipment and manpower into Indonesia 
ostensibly in support of Indonesia's claim but, in fact, to further
their own aims.  This would. be the inevitable result of conflict 
and one that Australians would look unon with horror.

            The only other thing thatt I want to say about this 
problem is in connection with the such abused term self-determination. 
We have placed great store on the right of New Guineans to choose 
their own future but not all people think as we do. The Dutch 
tried to move resolutions in the United Nations which would have 
given effective control of West New Guinea to the United Nations. 
Because such intervention by the United Nations might have been taken 
by the Indonesians as a rebuff there was not a sufficiently large
United Nations majority to bring about this change. Even though the 
Dutch had made their offer of self-determination for the West New 
Guineans, because there were overtones of emotionalism stemming from 
past Colonial activities of the Dutch, there was no possibility of 
such an offer being accepted by the Afro-Asian bloc in the United
Nations Organization.  The word self-determination has, in the past,
been used by different people to mean different things. Over the 
trouble in the Belgian Congo, Katanga was not allowed to secede from


                                                           />>

                              *NO


the Congo because. Katanga nossessed the vealth that the other States - 
needed if the Congo is to have an independent entity. Thus, in 
the interests of the Congo a whole, the Katangas are not allowed 
to give expression to their wish for self-determination as an
independent State. I say this merely to point out that self- 
determination is not necessarily the only consideration that Nations 
take into account in settling problems such as the one that is 
present between Indonesia and the Dutch.. If it was the only 
consideration the situation to our north uould be a good deal easier 
to solve than it is.

