<!--start metadata-->
Title: Alternatives for national servicemen
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 15/06/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                  -




 FOR PRESS              No. 4902


        ALTERNATIVES FOR NATIONAL SERVICIMEN

        Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
          the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.


     Some 2000 National Servicemen who were in the first Army
 intake in July 1965 will complete their two year period of full-time 
 service on June 30.
     They will now become members of the Regular Army Reserve for
 a period of three years unless they decide to join the Citizen Military 
 Forces or the Regular Army Emergency Reserve.

     Announcing this today, the Minister for the Army, Mr. Malcolm 
 Fraser, said that while they were members of the Regular Army Reserve, 

 National Servicemen would not, at present, be required to undertake
 further training but would be liable to be called up in time of war or 
 Defence emergency.

     As members of the Reserve they would be required to notify 
 annually, in writing, their address or any change of address.

    National Servicemen who would otherwise be members of the Regular
 Army Reserve and who wished to maintain a more active link with the Army 
 may volunteer to join the CMF.

    If accepted, they would be required to serve for not less than
 three years, involving a 14 days camp and a number of home parades annually.
    Members of the CMF may only be called up for full-time service 
 during war or a state of Defence emergency.

    Alternatively, such National Servicemen may volunteer to serve 

 with the Regular Armyemergency Reserve. If accepted, they would be
 required to serve for not less than four years involving a period 
 of 14 days full-time training each year.

    Members of the Emergency Reserve may be called up for service 
 in advance of a proclaimed state of Defence emergency.
    Some of those National Servicemen due to complete their full-time 
 service this month had already indicated that they intended to apply to 
 join the CMF or the RAER.
    If they would now prefer to join the Regular Army Reserve these 
 National Servicemen. would be given a chance to reconsider the position.
    The rest had the opportunity between now and June 30 to consider 
 whether they would join the CMF or the RAER.

    The high standard of service they had rendered the Army was a 
 tribute to the calibre of the average National Serviceman and a
 particularly pleasing feature was their completely successful integration 
 into the Regular Army.



                  Lists: A and B.
                  Further information:
             CANBERRA: Major Ross-Smith
15 June 1967       (65-4061) (49-6030)
           OTHER f TA TES : ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

