<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliament and the budget
Description: radio talk 
Date: 21/10/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              RADIO TALK - 21st October, 1956.
                  Parliament andthe Budget.
           Last weeks. the House of Representatives lir finished 
the debate on the Estimates and for the rest of this Session we will 
be largely concerned with small and relatively unimportant Bills 
which will carry into effect the many changes announced in the Budget. 
I believe it is not always readily understood how Parliament works 
in these matters and so tonight I want to take a few minutes to ex- 
plain the procedure of passing the BudL t through the House of 
Representatives.
            In the first place for a period of two or three weeks 
the Budget as a whole is debated, the Speaker is in the Chair and 
Members ozzlipkomootrotEu should confine themselves to the broad issues
of national: policy. The Budget debate itself is not necessarily 
the time to pick out minor details or to criticise small points of 
difference in opinion for there is a specific time to do this later 
in the debate on the Estimates.
            The Opposition in accordance with its duties to oppose 
the Government in the Federal House nearly always moves a notice of
censure on the Government. This is done by moving that the first 
item in the Budget be reduced by £1. This might seem a strange 
way of showing disapproval of a Budget that totals over £1,000,000,000 
but it is the traditional form which has been followed by Oppositions
during the years.  This year Dr. Evatt's censure motion was
defeated by a decisive majority.
             When the Budget as a whole has been passed the House 
then resolves itself into committee. Here I would like to say that 
all finance bills or financial measures Bust pass through the 
committee sta of the House. This again is the txxtixi traditional 
form of prop ' e inherited from the British Parliament.
             When the House is in committee the Speaker leaves 
the Chair and the House is kept in order and the Standing Orders are 
maintained by the Chairman of Committees or by one of his deputies.

                                     2



These chairmen don't sit in the Speaker's place which is raised 
above the floor of the House but they do sit at the table in the i6 

centre of the Chamber between the two Clerks of the House who are

constantly in attendance.
                  During the Estimates the Government moves the 

guillotine and this it must do if business is to tr oeecd without 

undue waste of tilse. It is again the traditional and customary 

procedure, although it may seam that the rights and privileges 

of Members to speak on certain items are limited by bringing the 

guillotine. It is in fact generally done and worked out between

 the Government's Leader in the House -w la
                   t                    r° òr Laboufrând a ti on ; .-            .
 and for TrainsT - L ^n nd his counterpart on the Opposition side•
_etswibi6mW.JiAssibeiNeiWeIT.  All the guillotine does is to set the time
 limit for the various      groups of Departments.          These may be
 banded together, two,      three or four Departments at a time and then
 each group is taken and debated in turn for a fixed period, after 

 which the House will pass on to the next group of Departments. 
                   Members may speak twice for a period of 15 minutes
  on each group c[Depart&ents and in general it is           found that every- 
  one who wants to speak on any particular sub.ect           can do so although
  it is =may equally true that if a particularly             contentious    subject
  arises concerning any particular Department then           there will be some p

  people who will not be able to speak on that subject because of the

  time limit.               during
                    It is =wiz the Estimates debate that Members

  should pick out detailed points which they believe require criticism 

  of one kind or another. It is here that i embers can debate more 

  properly the administration of any particular Department concernin€
  the things that they have       done or the    things  which in the view of
  the Member the Department       should have    done.    While the Departments
  are being criticised the appropriate Ministers will be sitting at 

  the Table of the House, and as points are brought up which they 

  believe require a reply for the information of Members and of the

         •^•

country they will rise to their feet to explain or to 
defend their Department:AO policy.
     At the end of last week the Estimates for the 
final group of Departments were pased through the House of 
Representatives, which means the Budget in general and 
in detail for the year 1956/57 latterbecome the law of the
land       ___.J?c_w_e_54 4e.
       ,7(t„0   fir"

