<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth aid for roads, Commonwealth re-distribution
Description: press statement
Date: 8/03/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           PRESS STATEMENT:

           MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                                   March 8th, 1964


                           In the first week of the Federal Parliament there is a 
          fair amount of shaking down that is necessary before Parliament can get
           down to the hard work that undoubtedly lies ahead of the session. It 
          will be a long session, not only because there is new policy to imple- 
          ment as a result of the election but also because there are agreements 
          with the States which expire at the end of this year and which will have 
           to be renewed.

           COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS

                           One of these agreements involves Commonwealth Aid to
•          Roads, which has totalled £250M over the last five years and which the 
           Prime Minister promised would total at least £350M over the next five. 
           This will involve a good deal of dispute and much hard bargaining. 
          Several different interests are at work, Each State is concerned to 
           develop a formula that will give a larger share of funds to his own 
          State, but in addition to this the Lord Mayors of the capital cities 
          have all been particularly active in trying to get special funds for
          their capital city development.   Furthermore, rural interests are 
          Most concerned to maintain their share of the total grants that they 
          have had over recent years,

                           These different pressures will work themselves out by 
          approaches to members of Parliament and to Ministers and, finally, in 
          a Premiers' Conference that is to be held shortly.

                           It is most important when the final decisions are 
          known that we should judge them not purely in the light of our own 
          particular need and belief, but in the light of what we think is best 
          for Australia as a whole. If the Lord Mayors don't get all the money 
          they would like I hope and believe they would recognize that rural 
•         roads need the continued development that they have had over past years. 
          There have certainly been tremendous strides made in country areas. 
          When I first began electioneering in 19531 would very often be 
          travelling on gravel roads and now these are rare and I find myself 
          grumbling to some extent if I have to get off the bitumen.










                                                                         /2

                                        -  2

         COMMONWEALTH REDISTRIBUTION:

                     A spark flew when the member from Bradfield, speaking on the 
         Address-in-Reply, called the redistribution proposals included in the 
         Governor-General's speech a gerrymander. This received quite wide 
         publicity. While I have a great respect for the member for Bradfield, 
         Mr. Turner, I don't agree with him on this particular matter.

                     Mr, Turner comes from one of those metropolitan seats in 
         Sydney which is, in fact, and from an electoral point of view, easy to 
         service. Incidentally it is one of the best seats in Australia, At 
         the last election his majority was 30,000.

                     A country growing as rapidly as Australia obviously needs 
         redistribution every so often. This is to keep pace with the growth 
         and shift in population. While the average number of people in seats 
         in Australia may be about 45,000 some seats have dropped to less than 
         30,000, while there are two that are pushing the 100,000 mark. This 
         is quite inequitable and something has to be done about it.

                     The redistribution that was introduced after the last
         census was defeated because two political parties in the Commonwealth 
         Parliament indicated they were going to oppose it and the redistribution 
         was dropped, One of the reasons the redistribution did not receive 
         support was that under the formulae that are used at present, even though 
         a State may increase its population if another State increases its 
         population at a greater rate then the first State may lose a seat. This 
         Vas going to happen to Western Australia and I think also Queensland: 
         Under the proposal introduced in the last Parliament there were a
         great number of people who could not understand why a State that had
         increased its population should lose a seat. The Governor-General's 
         speech announced that the Representation Act would be amended so that no 
         State can lose a seat under the kind of circumstances that I have been 
         talking about,

                     The Government has also recognised that there is an in- 
         equitable division within different States at the present time. From 
         one redistribution to the next we find that some seats have more than 
•        doubled in size while others have shrunk to under 30,000. This is 
         largely because of slum clearance in capital cities and because many 
         people in the inner city area have moved to outer suburbs. Because of 
         this and because of the difficulties of representing large areas the 
         Electoral Act will also be amended so that the Distribution Commissioners 
         shall take into account community and regional interests, difficulties of 
         communication, the trend of population changes and the relative areas of 
         proposed divisions. This provision is in the present act to a certain 
         extent, but it has never been used by the Distribution Commissioners to 
         any marked extent and, as I understand the proposal, the amendment will 
         emphasise and make it obligatory for these matters to be taken into 
         account.

                     One of the important points here is to bear in mind the 
         difficulty of proper representation. It is a relatively easy job for a 
         metropolitan member to represent an area that might take them ten minutes 
         to cross. It is a much more difficult job to give proper representation 
         to an area that may extend for one hundred or hundreds of miles. This, 
         of course, depends to some extent on the roads and transport facilities 
         and distribution of population within the area, but there is no doubt 
         that the country member has been under an enormous disadvantage when 
         compared with the city member in his efforts to serve his area faithfully 
         and actively. The amount of travelling and the time lost in travelling 
         alone is sufficient to emphasise this difference.




                                                                         /3

                     3


             I think it was unfortunate and inaccurate for the member 
     for Bradfield to call these proposals a gerrymander. They were mentioned 
     in the Prime Minister's policy speech in practically the same terms as they 
     are included in the Governor-General's speech. No such charges were made 
     then by any one person in Australia, or if so I didn't hear of them. 
     Since an election was in provess one would have expected the Opposition 
     to attack us on these matters perhaps even if they thought there was 
     little justification for the attack but, as I recall, no attack was made.

             In the Commonwealth Parliament redistribution has 
     always been free from gerrymander and under the present Government, 
     Australia may be sure that it will remain so.



                    000


•

