<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Description: radio talk
Date: 2/05/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              z/ir/-6(



                                    How much fertiliser should the primary producer use? This is 
a question that has been occupying scientists of the C.S.I.R.O. for 
some time — time and effort that has cost money, but from which results 
are already beginning to emerge to the undoubted ultimate benefit of 
the rural producers of this country.The experiments, within the Soils Division of the Organisation, 
   are being carried .out with the aim of achieving techniques that will 
   enable men who work the land to put exactly the right amount of fertiliser 
   into their soils for the maximum economic return. At the moment a 
   producer is inclined to consider that he has the correct measure if he 
   operates on a fertiliser component which has been worked out to suit a 
   certain wide area — a whole district. But the thought behind the work 
   of the men of the C.S.I.R.O. is that this is not good enough. They are 
   working on the idea of a paddock—to—paddock analysis of a property's 
   soils, to determine the exact level of fertiliser Which should be used 
   as dressing for the differing soils on that property. There is a 
   possibility of millions of dollars being earned — or saved — by 
   application of these techniques to the cropped and pasture-improved areas.
   of Australia                                                                 an area of some size. This area was calculated in 
   1965/66 to cover more than 48 million acres, of which over 39 million
   acres was fertilised.



                                         A pioneer in the field, is.Dr. J.D. Colwell of the Organisation's
       Soils Division. He did preliminary work some years ago. Gradually 
       the importance of his work became clear, and the project expanded in 
       both size and stature until today Dr. E.G. Hallsworth, Chief of the 
       Organisation's Soils Division, comments, 'It is about the most 
       important thing we are working. on in the Division'.
                                         Dr. Colwell is now senior chemist to the project in New South Wales, 
       and he and Mr Bruce Butler, officer in charge of soils work in the 
       Division, are the two top field men on the project in New South Wales 
       and Victoria. Today the project embraces five States and is still 
       growing. The project is expected to continue for about another four years. 
       The main part of the experiments have dealt with soil fertility response 
       with wheat, a crop selected because of its wide dispersal throughout 
       Australia. In the wheat trials there are 30 separate experimental sites 
       in New South Wales, 30 in Victoria, 20 in South Australia, about 50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /2

in Western Australia as well as additional sites in the other States. 
At each site the scientists have prepared 48 separate plots, and in 
these they grow the wheat using varying applications of fertiliser in 
which the levels of phosphate, nitrogen, sulphur and potash are varied.
    Now the scientists have found that in many areas the growers were 
putting in far too'little fertiliser, and in others they were wasting 
money by putting in needlessly large amounts. What they sought was to 
calculate the exact amount of input, so as to produce the maximum degree 
of increased profit for every acre planted and dressed. They had some 
interesting results.
    Cost—response figures involved in the project have by no means
reached completion, but we can talk about some of the results achieved 
in the Southern New South Wales wheat belt.
    One test was with soil containing only five parts per million of 
phosphorous, and it was found that in this locality the average superphosphate 
dressing being used was 165 lbs. to the acre. By using this amount of 
fertiliser, the grower was earning an extra profit of $11.71 an acre over 
and above what he would have been returned had he used no fertiliser at all.
    The C.S.I.R.O. tests showed however that he should have used much 
more fertiliser about 310 lbs. This would have cost him more, but it would 
have brought him in even more profit.
    For instance, had the grower sown 500 acres of wheat, using 165 lbs 
an acre'his profit would have been $5800 more than if he had used no . 
superphosphate. But if he used the rate of dressing revealed in the tests, 
his profit would have increased by a further $700, as a result of listening 
to the C.S.I.R.O. This isn't a bad additional return ofj,500 acres.'
    Likewise on other soils, tests have shown that a grower can save 
money by using much lower levels of fertiliser than is usual for his 
district. /apt.,
   •-~ year the research project 411 cost about $203,000 — including 
$63,000 contributed by fertiliser companies. Labour, materials and loan 
of equipment was also contributed by the fertiliser companies to the value 
of about $10,000. In the past 18 months an additional $100,000 has been 
spent on equipment, including contributions from the fertiliser companies 
and the Wheat Industry Research Council.
   The Division has. also begun a programme dealing with fertiliser 
response with improved pastures. There are four pasture sites in Victoria, 
including one at the Pastoral Research Station at Hamilton and one at
Bairnsdale.
   At Hamilton, nearly 300 pasture plots have been established. 
Because of the special problems of experimenting with pasture, the 
scientists at this stage are attempting to evolve methods of attacking
          e4_„,

u








                                                                     They are seeking the right scientific procedure - the development 
                                     of a technique - for studying fertiliser requirements in pasture. Plots 
                                     consits of pure species, or of a mixture of clover and grass. Because it 
                                     is the rate of recovery of the pasture which determines the final value of 
                                     fertiliser treatment, two methods of cut-back have been used - grazing by
                                     sheep, and by mechanical mowing.The State Department has established the pasture and is responsible
                                     for grazing and cutting, while the C.S.I.R.O. team are involved in the soil 
                                     science and statistical work. Dr. Colwell said, 'There ii close
                                       co-operation between us.'     All the Victorian work, including the wheat tests, is done in
                                         co-operation with the Victorian Department of Agriculture. No economic 
                                         results are yet available from the pasture experiments. But efforts are 
                                         being made to show that a greater efficiency of fertiliser dressing, with 
                                         consequent;ços't savings, could be proved. However, noone really doubts 
                                         that the research will result in a much more efficient use of fertiliser 
                                         over the cropped and pasture...improved area of Australia. When the tests 
                                         can be applied farmers should get greater profits either from larger 
                                         returns or from reduced costs: For the high cost areas it represents
                                         one of the most exciting pieces of rural research.
                                                                        Meeting in Canberra this week was a group of Very Important People
                                         whose deliberations are of interest to a wide range of Australian activity, 
                                         including manufacturing, farming, the pastoral industry, mining, public 
                                         authorities, and the general public. They are members of the C.S.I.R.O. 
                                         Advisory Council, which usually meets twice a year and has a membership of 33.
                                                                        The Council exists as a channel for advice and criticism of 
                                         C.S.I.R.O. activities and has a variety of functions to perform. They 
                                         include - advising the Organisation's Executive on the general work of 
                                         C.S.I.R.O.; advising the Executive on any particular matter of investigation 
                                         or research; and making recommendations in relation to allocation of
                                         Organisation funds.
                                                                          It consists of nine members of the C.S.I.R.O. Executive itself
                                            (including the Chairman, Sir Frederick White), the Chairmen of State 
                                         Committees and a number of co-opted members representing a wide range
                                         of university, industrial and governmental interests.
                                                                          They include graziers Mr E.P.S. Roberts, of Toobeah (South Queensland),
                                         a part-time member of the Executive; Mr E.H. Lee-Steere, of Perth, State 
                                         Committee Chairman; and Mr W.J.D. Shaw, of Hamilton (Queensland), 
                                         a co-opted Council member.

