<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: electoral talk
Date: 22/08/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           J AUSTRALIA ,L-'



       PRIME MINISTER


FOR MEDIA         SUNDAY, 22 AUGUST 1982



          ELECTORATE TALK


With the tax cuts and relief from interest rates provided in 
the Budget, the Budget offers an opportunity which Australians 
cannot afford to miss, to obtain community-wide support for 
wage restraint and co-operation. The combination of personal 
tax cuts and the new tax rebate on home interest rates will 
improve the position of Australian families dramatically. 
The Budget also addresses the wider needs of Australian families 
with increases in family allowances and through the new family 
income supplement of $10.00 a week for each dependant child 
for low income families.

The Budget also improves the position of other needy groups
substantially and the efforts of Australian industry to achieve
greater competitiveness will be helped by specific Budget measures
which build upon the industry package announced on 19 July.
The kind of co-operation which Australia needs today cannot,
however, be achieved by Governments alone, it cannot be imposed
as a matter of Government policy. The Government has done what
it can in giving a lead, and providing a basis for co-operation
to prevent any new wage push, and I believe the community
will want employers and employees, management and unions, to
heed the Government's call for moderation and co-operation.

It is important to realise that the ACTU has not yet given 
its real response in a practical way to the fact that many 
things in the Budget are consistent with what they have been 
advocating. But it is encouraging that the ACTU has welcomed 
the tax cuts in the Budget as a contribution to stability in 
industrial relations, as satisfying ACTU demands for "tax 
indexation and an equitable redistribution of the income tax 
burden away from the lower income earners and families", and 
is alleviating "the need for unions to apply income tax increases 
into claims for cost of living adjustments".

This degree of acceptance represents a major advance. What the 
public now expects is that the union movement will respond 
positively to the basis of co-operation which the Budget has 
established, and I am confident that it will do so in practice. 
A good deal has already been achieved and I have referred 
previously to wage and salary settlements well below the level 
of inflation and to recent successful examples of co-operation 
in the shipping and coal industries.

What we need is a willingness of groups within our community not 
to push demands which are out of line with these recent
settlements and to take account of the enormous costs in terms 
of employment and Australia's long term economic prospects which 
would flow almost inevitably from significant wage rises at this 
time.

When we look at the urgent need for co-operation the Labor Party's 
talk about prices and incomes policy is total irrelevance. Labor
17as not got a policy on prices and incomes. The whole proposal 
is utterly vague and ill-defined, it provides no basis for 
effective economic management in difficult times. But there 
isno doubt that in practice, a so-called prices and incomes 
policy would mean support from the Labor Party for higher wage 
rises than the economy can afford, together with Government 
provided benefits which would increase Government spending massively 
and fuel inflation as a result..

It is also clear that after 12 months of detailed discussion, 
Labor has not got real ACTU commitment to practical and
realistic policies. That is not surprising because Labor's 
policies are vague in the extreme and Labor has certainly got 
no agreement to a prices and incomes policy from the employers, 
because it has apparently not yet seen fit even to consult them.

People should also remember that in any case a deal with the 
ACTU would not be a deal with all the unions. What do the
metal trades unions, the air traffic controllers, the Bass 
Strait oil workers, the railway workers in Queensland, the BLF 
and the Shop Assistants' Union, for example think about all of 
this? What would they be prepared to'do? The Labor Party 
never has and never will be able to get the Australiàn community 
to work together. The time when Mr Hayden was in Government and 
when Mr Hawke was President of the ACTU and of the Labor Party, 
tells the story of Labor's economic and industrial incompetence 
in Government, because at that time, when they had the chance 
to show what they could do, Australia's industrial relations were 
disastrous. The almost 62 million working days lost through 
strikes and disputes in 1974 is more than 50% greater than the 
number of working days lost last year and as we all know last 
year was not a good year for industrial relations.

Labor would again pursue divisive policies. Labor's policies 
remove all incentive to co-operate. Labor would give special and 
unreasonable privileges to the trade unions, which would give the 
unions every reason to be immoderate in their demands. Labor's 
distrust of the private sector means that business will never 
have confidence under Labor, that its interests will neverbe taken 
into account.

Labor would deliberately favour sectional interests, especially 
through practices such as trade union preference, which would 
not provide a basis for the community as a whole to work together. 
Wherever Labor has had a.chance to govern., it has always caused 
economic chaos through mismanagement and wrong policies and 
this does not happen by chance. It happens because Labor's
socialism means that Labor Governments try to drive Australians 
where they'do not want to go and this prevents Australians from 
working together or co-operating. Australia cannot afford that. 
It is only-with responsible, practical economic policies and by 
working together, that we will be able to keep building this country 
and overcome present economic problems.

