<!--start metadata-->
Title: The Government, health and pensions
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: c1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                        THE GOjrE ZT a:     t_ExLM edTD PENSIONS.







                in the last four years, quietly and without any fuss, a comprehensive 




  "ational Health eervice has been introduced by the Federal Government. As we shall see



                                   ~ fo every Australian to receive diverse hospital and
  this scheme makes i t 1 ~. possible 




 medical benefits, and this is rarticularly important not onlyfor age and invalid 




  rensioners, but also for people with young families.




                Recently, the Federal Government has entered into an agreement with the 





  States to wage an allout campaigns against tuberculosis. This includes a maximum 




  weekly allowance , for a sufferer of TM., of 29/2/2 plus 9/- for each child. 




  Under the Chifley Government only w16O,00G was provided- as a measure against T.B., 




  compared with nearly 16 million, made available for special hospitals by the present 




  Federal Government. A thousand beds have also been provided and a further thousand.. 




  five hundred are contembl.ated for almost immediate use. (, The 1953/4 cost to the





. Commonwealth will be 15,700,000.) Free life-saving and disease preventing drugs




  have been available to the whole community since 1950. More than 200 drugs are now




  covered and any medical practioner may           authorise their use. There are now ten




  thousand doctors participating in this scheme, covering an annual ten million- 




  prescriptions, at a cost of nearly L8million to the Government. How much was spent 




  by the Labour Government? $,mere 1150,000, and no more than a hundred and fifty 




  doctors participated in the Labour scheme.




                 Any people receiving Wage, invalid, widows or service pensions may now 





  get free medical attention, for the first time in Australia's history. Last year, 




  over three million services by doctors were made available to the pensioners 




  (comsletely at the Federal Government's expen9e),, involving the sum of almost 




  X13 million. What did the Labour Government provide? -- Nothing.There was no such





  scheme operating under Labour.




                 Children under thirteen are given free milk, up to half a pint a day. 





  Nearly 4+9- seven hundred and fifty thousand schoolchildreb are receiving this 




  benefit. the cost of which in the year 1953/4 was over 12 million. Under Labour 




  this scheme did not operate, and was not even contemplated.




                 The recent ealt f3bheme scheme also provides comprehensive eospital 




  Benefits; 12/- a day Commonwealth contribution for pensioners in public wards; A




  minimum Commonwealth payment of 8/- a day for every patient in public or private 

                         extra


  hospitals and 47-/for those contributing to an authorised fund, in additionto the





  Thnd benefit which makes a total of at least 18/- a day. The cost in 1953/4 was





   approximately 18,500,000 as compared with the sum of 15,900,000 spent bybhe Labour 





   Government in the year 1948/9. Those who contribute to an authorised fund also

                                          2
have 75°" to 90/ of doctors' fees paid by the Government e  The cost of these, which
cover a wide range of ailments and treatments, was estimated at $ E3,504000 for the 
year 1953/4. Under the Labour Government, nothing operated.
               This Health Scheme covers every Australian, with additional benefits 
for pensioners and for those who contribute to an authorised fund or society. This 
latter provision was made so that the Government would be saved the expense of establish- 
ing a. new organisation to administer the scheme.
               In addition to giving each pensioner free medical services of all kinds 
which average 8/- a week. for every person, the story of the direct contribution to 
pensioners is itself an interesting one. Over the four year period in which the Govern- 
ment. has been in office,the pension has been raised from 42/6. to 70/- a week. This more 
thau covers the ±ise in the cost of living, while in the last Budget of the Labour 
Government no increase was given to the pensioners eiram though the cost of living rose 
by 9A. The Liberal Party has granted 48/- of the total pension while its increases over 
the last four years, of 27/6, is 5/6-more than all the increase ever given by the Labour 
Party. These increases have involved an extra expenditure of Z'30 million. This last 
Budget granted people on reduced pensions an extra I2/6 to 32/6 a week. Liberalisation 
of the _,eans Test has brought an extra ten thousand. people into the pension field, and 
pemmissible income for a full pension has been increased from 10/- to 40/-.
              It is interesting to note that a pensioner and his wife, both ad the 
pension, get the equivalent of the basic wage- free of tax r that is, w'7 pension, 
  £4 permissable income, and 16/- medical benefits.
               In its last years of office, the Labour Patty. spent £81 million on
social services. In this last year, the Menzies Government has provided over ZI84 million. 
This record has never been equalled in the history of our Commonwealth.
                  Anyone who did not know the story of these last four years might 
    think that these increased Government services to the whole nation would involve 
    higher taxation. '?his is not so. The general policy of the government has led to 
    greater production both industrially and agriculturally, and consequently to a 
    higher level of prosperity for every Australian. Because of this increased nation- 
    al income, it has been possible not only tomfinance these extra services but also 
    to reduce taxation. single man earning £600 now pays 543/19/- tax asAagainst 
    £57/I0/- at the last Labour Budget. A married man with two children paid £26 in 
    1949.. Today he pays £13 - a 50a reduction. Dependant and Ledicgl Allowances have 
    also bean increased from 2104, the amount claimable for a wife, to £134 education • 
    allowances have been increased from £50 to £75 ; and the medical allowance has 
    been increased from £50 to £150.
                  In addition to this,-sales tax has been greatly reduced on many items.

• Pr-the four year term of office, the maximum rate has .been reduced from 666L to 16.
 The total cost of this torthe Government has been nearly Pi& million.
       Also we must not forget the special depreciation allowances for farmers-,m 
 One fifth of the purchase price of many machines, or structural improvements to a
 prep property, is now allowed each year for five years. This means that a whole 
 range of capital improvements can be written off over five years. This provision has 
 been of great help to the farmers in improving their properties.
       ?educed taxation and increased social services have both been achieved 
 over these last four years, ;hen we think of -the economic disorder, of the low 
 state of rroducfion and of t e industrial unrest that was prevalent before 1949 
 to say nothing of the shortages of many es>ential materials that were holding u.p 
 development both in the country and in the cities, theachievement is a remarkable 
 tribute to the .-government. With this greater prosperity we now have jobs- for all. 
 Let's pull together in the next years as we have in the past four to mare sure 
 the advantages we have been given from sound government are preserved and cherished.

