<!--start metadata-->
Title: Re-organisation of the Australian Meat Board
Description: press statement
Date: 19/04/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


          PRESS STATE1ENT


          Ï4ÌALCOLM FRASER:


                                                                 April 19th,1964



                        RE.-ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN mEAT BOARD



                        Last week I wrote about the changed world trading conditions 
         which has made it necessary for the Government at the request of producer 
         organizations to re-organize the Australian Meat Board.


                     The new Board will be smaller and more compact than the old 
         one which had to resort to a committee system before it could decide many 
         major issues. The old Board had 12 members comprising of a Chairman, 
         a Government representative, together with people from the beef, lamb, 
         mutton and pig industries. There was also a representative from public 
         utilities and from meat employees. The new Board will have nine members; 
         the Chairman, five meat producers' representatives and two meat export 
         representatives, together with a representative from the Commonwealth.


                     There is immediately a significant difference between the two 
         Boards in addition to the difference in size. The meat producer 
         representatives will be appointed from a panel suggested to the Minister 
ï        by what is called the Australian Meat Board Selection Committee. These 
         representatives will have their names put forward, not because they 
         represent a particular part of the meat industry but because of their
         overall ability to do a job on the Board. It is thought that it is more 
         important to get people who can take a broad view of the whole position 
         rather than represent one particular segment of the industry. Nearly all 
         the Australian meat exported abroad is exported by private traders who 
         find markets in 60 to 70 countries of the world. These people with an 
         intimate knowledge of world markets will have two members appointed by 
         the Minister from names submitted to the Australian Meat Exporters Federal 
         Council. This Council is representative of all the great meat exporting 
         firms. Their advice and knowledge should prove a valuable addition to the 
         membership of the Board. It must be pointed out, however, that the 
        producer representatives will have an absolute majority on the Board and 
         thus will be in full control of its activities.


                    A moment ago I mentioned the Australian Meat Board Selection 
         Committee. This is a body established with a certain constitution by 
ï        the Australian Wool Growers and Graziers' Council and the Australian Wool
        and Meat Producers' Federation.  The main, and almost the sole function 
         of this Committee, will be the nomination of meat producers' representatives 
        for appointment by the Minister to the Board. The Selection Committee 
        consists of nine members, an independent chairman and four members from 
        each of the organizations I mentioned. This Selection Committee begins 
        life with the same disabilities as has handicapped the Australian Wool 
        industry Conference. The Australian Wool Industry Conference does not 
        yet give recognition to the Australian Primary Producers' Union, nor will 
        the Australian Meat Board. Selection Committee.


                   On past occasions I have said that this Union should be 
        represented on the Conference. I believe that it should also be represented 
        on the Australian Meat Board Selection Committee. The Australian Dairy 
        Farmers' Federation should also have some representation on the meat Board 
        Selection Committee because of the fact that just under 15% of beef 
        slaughtered is represented by the slaughter of old dairy cows and a great 
        deal of this meat finds markets abroad, especially in the United States.


                   However, certain procedures have been followed concerning new 
        membership in the Wool Industry Conference. The Minister has said that 
        he confidently expects the Australian Primary Producers' Union to be



                                                                        /2

                                           -  2 -


          included on the Conference in the near future. Since these procedures 
          and precedents have been laid down it is unrealistic, I believe, to 
          expect the Government to follow a different course in relation to the 
          Australian heat Board Selection Committee.

                      The new Board will have wider powers than the old ones It 
          will be financed from the levy on the slaughter of all cattle over 200 lbs. 
          dressed weight and sheep and lambs. No charges have been fixed as yet, 
          but the sort of figure that has been spoken about is 5/- a head for cattle 
          and 6d; tor sheep. This would supply a fund of something under £2 million 
          each year. These funds could be used for the development of markets over- 
          seas, for the promotion and sale of Australian meat overseas or for 
          promotion inside Australia.

                      Under certain circumstances the Board will have power to 
          purchase and sell meat in its own right after consultation with a
          special consultative committee which will be composed of four members 
          from the Australian Meat Exporters' Federal Council, together with four 
          members from the Australian Meat Board, together with the Chairman of the 
ï         Board, The Board can only use this power where there is special
          marketing problems which preclude the effective participation of private 
          traders.

                      The Australian Agriculture Council,unfortunately perhaps, 
          expressed reservations about giving the new Board power over research, 
          thus the current arrangements for beef research will be continued 
          independent of the new Board.

                      It is the Government's ultimate intention, however, that 
          research will also be provided within the ambit of the Board. Meanwhile, 
          the present beef research committee will obtain a part of the levy for
          research purposes and the old research levy will be abolished. The 
          Government pound for pound subsidy on money spent on research will be 
          continued.

                      The re-organization of the Meat Board is fully in line with 
          Government policy, which is designed to try and create a sound overall 
          control for the industry upncerned. The legislation will provide a 
          management that leaves control in the hands of the producers concerned 
          but which, at the same time, has available to it expert advice on various 
          technical matters.

