<!--start metadata-->
Title: Voting rights for Aborigines
Description: press statement
Date: 25/06/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                PRESS STATEMENT                              June 25th,1961
                                 VOTING RIGHTS FOR ABORIGINES
                     Last session the Minister for Territories made a statement 
                in the Parliament regarding the aim of all Australian Governments, 
                both State and Federal, as it affected the aboriginal population
                of Australia.  The statement was made setting forth the 
                resolutions of a Conference that had been held between the
                Authorities of the different Governments.  The debate was note- 
                worthy, coming as it did after the arguments in the Commonwealth 
                and in the world over South Africa and her racial policies. It 
                was important because it showed quite clearly in what direction 
                Australia is heading, and it showed quite clearly that Australian 
                objectives are ones that would have the support of all progressive 
                people throughout the world.
                     Our aim is one of assimilation as full partners, and the 
                paper tabled by the Minister for Territories re-emphasised that 
                all Governments, both State and Federal, were doing what they 
                could to achieve this aim.
                     I have occasionally heard people say : "Why can't all 
 •              aborigines be given full citizen rights at the present time?- 
                "Why can't they take their place in the Australian community as
                full partners now?"  The answer to this is, of course, that 
                about 30,000 aborigines or part aborigines already have these 
                rights throughout all the States and throughout the territories
                of the Commonwealth.  But, at the same time,there are about 
                70,000 aborigines or part aborigines who would not be able to 
                take their full and proper place in society and, without proper 
                training, would not be able to do so.
                      The Conference between the States and the Commonwealth 
                recognised that in different States different programs might have
                to be followed out in pursuit of assimilation.  Something that 
•               is applicable to Victoria with very few aborigines might not be 
                applicable to Queensland or Western Australia with large numbers. 
                But, quite clearly, over the northern areas of Australia, there 
                will have to be a greater assimilation of tribes and people who 
                are still living in a nomadic or semi-nomadic state. More health 
                and education services will have to be made available and child
                welfare services should be extended.  There are already special
                schools for aborigines which is an important step. However, it
                must be emphasised that these special schools are not a permanent 
                institution. The ultimate aim is to have aboriginal and white 
                children learning in the same schools as they do already in some
                schools in Australia.  But aborigines who are living in a nomadic 
                or semi-nomadic state and who know little or no English cannot
                take their place in a white school.  Language and environment
                difficulties make a special education necessary. It should be 
                emphasised that these aboriginal children are handicapped only 
                by these things, but they are not handicapped by a lack of 
                natural intelligence which, on the average, is as keen as that 
                of white children.

                                             2    -
                         Vocational training is going to be increasingly important
                for the aborigines.    Up to the present time, most aborigines who 
                are taking their part in the white community earn their livelihood 
                as stockmen in the pastoral industry of the three northern States. 
                The pastoral industry may not be able to find jobs for all the 
                aborigines in the future, and it will be important that they are 
                trained in other jobs and trades so that a greater field of employ- 
                ment will be open to them.
                          The Minister for Territories is to be congratulated on
                the work he has done.   It should be recalled that it was the 
                present Commonwealth Government that created the Department of 
                Territories in 1951, and Paul Hasluck has been the Minister for
                Territories since that time.    The moves towards assimilation 
                which have been made have nearly all been put in train by the 
                present Minister.
                           In another measure that was before the House, the 
                Opposition moved an amendment that would have given all aborigines 
                at the present time a vote for the Commonwealth Parliament, the 
                argument being that if they don't all have a vote for the 
                Parliament it creates unfavourable propaganda abroad.
                            The Government had previously appointed a Select 
                Committee composed of Members of both Parties to examine the
                question of voting rights for the aborigines.     I have said that 
                30,000 full bloods or part aborigines already have full voting 
                rights, so it is clear that these aborigines who do not have 
                voting rights are not excluded on grounds of colour or race. 
                They are excluded simply because, at present, they have no
                awareness of what democracy means.   They are, for the most part, 
                illiterate. Some are still nomads and some have only shortly 
                ceased being nomads. They would have no concept of what a 
                political election meant and no idea of what a ballot paper meant. 
•               Democracy is not strengthened by giving rights to people who 
                cannot understand these rights, and that is why the Government 
                would not accept the Opposition amendment.
                            Over the past 10 years many more people of aboriginal
                or part aboriginal blood have been given or have obtained full
                citizenship rights, and this progress will continue.   The 
                Commonwealth, however, was not happy with the speed of this progress 
                and thus the Select Committee was appointed to examine this position 
                to see what more can be done.
                            There is one small point that illustrates the difficulty 
                and, to some extent, the lack of sense involved in trying to give
                all aborigines full voting rights straight away.   It is well known 
                that if white people don't vote, unless they have a good reason,
                they can be fined 42.   It is almost certain that unless the 
                aborigines whom we are discussing were led to the polls by a white 
                person they would not vote because they would not know what it 
                was about. They would not have seen a newspaper or read the
                arguments on one side or the other.   Would it be reasonable to 
                fine them all 42?

