<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural policies to be pursued in the coming session
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 15/03/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER M.P.

RURAL POLICIES TO BE PURSUED IN THE COMING SESSION

   Another announcement made in the Governor General's speech was 
of particular importance to the dairying industry. The Government 
is now negotiating with to States concerning final details of legis- 
lation that will provide up to $25 million over the next four years 
to-aards the reconstruction of the dairying industry. The detail will 
depend upon the successful outcome of these negotations but the general 
purpose of the legislation will be to enable dairy farmers on small farms 
who are experiencing economic hardship and who wish to leave the industry 
to do so. The money will be provided to the States to enable them to 
purchase numbers of small dairy farms which will then be consolidated 
into economic units. It is expected the consolidated farm will in 
many cases be used for a different form of production. The Government 
believes that this scheme should help to bring into closer balance 
production and market demand for dairy produce, particularly butter.
   It should be emphasised that this scheme will be a voluntary one 
and it will depend upon a number of individual farmers believing that 
the Government's objective is a correct one and so voluntarily taking 
advantage of whatever provisions may be finally decided.
   In April of 1966 the FL,rm Development Loan Funds were established
in the private trading banks. These funds were originally established 
with a capital of $50 million. While this fund is not yet fully 
committed the Government wants to make sure that funds will be continually 
available to permit a steady rate of lending, and therefore action is 
being taken to increase the size of these funds by $37 million. The 
purpose of these funds is to make loans available for up to a maximum 
of about 15 years for farm development purposes.
   As a result of devaluation of the British pound, the Government
recognised before Christmas that some Australian industries could be 
adversely affected and the Government undertook to give assistance in 
those areas which suffered direct loss. Special committees were set up 
at that time to examine the problems in those areas. A Devaluation 
Reporting Committee of senior officials has submitted its first report 
on the losses suffered by rural industries as a result of devaluation and 
this report is receiving the attention of the Government.
   There are other matters in the Governor General's speech which I 
would like to mention but I will leave them till a later occasion.


15 March, 1968

