<!--start metadata-->
Title: Oil industry dispute, arbitration
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 6/08/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   3HA: Sunday 6 August, 1972. 
    BROADCAST:     3YB: Thursday 10 August, 1972. 
                   3LK: Wednesday 9 August, 1972.


      Keeping abreast of the oil industry dispute has been a 
    difficult business. The situation was a complex one and changed 
    from day to day, sometimes from hour to hour.

      As I speak now, the striking oil refinery maintenance 
•   men have returned to work. This gives us an opportunity to 
    consider in some kind of perspective a most damaging dispute 
    which a few union leaders embarked upon without regard for 
    the consequences of thousands of individual Australians and 
    their families.
      The central issue was a simple one. Was the umpire's 
    decision going to be accepted or respected? One side had 
    shown a willingness to accept the principle of arbitration and 
    the umpire's verdict. The other side had repudiated that 
•   verdict. As a consequence, a strike by about 1000 men held 
    Australia to ransom.
      It is not widely understood that the Federal Government's 
    firm action in the oil dispute created the industrial climate 
    for last week's return to work. The Government insisted that 
    the dispute should be settled by arbitration. At the same
    time, it prepared to have Federal Parliament recalled to enable 
    it to implement special measures to prevent the strike grinding 
    to a halt.

                          ...12

                 2.

       The Prime Minister was not seeking the recall of 
    Parliament for the sake of a debate. The urgent legislation 
    which we planned would have been revealed in the second reading 
    speech on the day of its introcuction.

       It is perfectly clear that the Government has essentially 
    achieved its objectives. The strike appears to be over. Oil 
    supplies are expected to return to normal soon. On Mr. Justice 
    Moore's initiative, taken within the climate created by the 
    Government, the dispute is being returned to the Arbitration
•   Commission.
       Most important, the principle of arbitration has been 
    retained. We must hope that from this week, the union leaders 
    will not persist in rejecting the Judge's rulings.
       The oil strike caused a great deal of damage and 
    inconvenience, especially in South Australia, New South Wales 
    and Queensland. It occurred because the union leaders involved 
    refused to accept the umpire's decision - in this case,
•   Mr. Justice Moore's "interim decision" pending the hearing of 
    the full union case.
       Until last week, Mr. Hawke as President of the A.C.T.U. 
    was not prepared to recommend a return to work. Such a 
    recommendation could have been made under the same terms and 
    conditions as have now occurred. It was always clear that the 
    hearing of the unions' full claims would proceed as soon as 
    there was a full resumption of work. What altered the situation 
    compared with the earlier occasion was the Prime Minister's 
    statement concerning the recall of Parliament.

                           .../3

                  3.
       In other words, the unions are returning to the umpire's 
    table under the terms and conditions that existed when they 
    left it. Thus, it has been an abortive and fruitless
    enterprise on the part of a few union leaders which had already 
    begun to involve many thousands of Australians in significant 
    hardship and which would, if it had continued, have involved 
    the whole nation.
       Australia has a system of arbitration for very good reasons.
•   It is an unhappy fact of life not only in Australia, -out also in 
    other countries, that unions and employers often see each other 
    as adversaries. Therefore, we have established a system of 
    industrial law, based first upon conciliation and second upon 
    arbitration.
       This practice has served Australia well, but it depends 
    upon a willingness of both parties to accept the judgment, 
    the decision of the umpire. That is an Australian tradition 
    which by and large we have been proud to follow.
•     We need to remember also that the arbitration system in 
    particular protects weak unions and weak employers. If it is 
    by-passed, if it is destroyed, then industrial law will become 
    the law of the survival of the strongest. Having in mind the 
    damaging effect of a strike by a thousand_ men in the oil industry, 
    what does one expect Mr. Laurie Carmichael to be able to achieve 
    in control of the new Amalgamated Metal Workers' Union with a 
    total membership of 180,000 and an income of $3 million a year?
      Let us hope that Mr. Hawke is unsuccessful in his bid to 
    smash the arbitration system and. create another record year of 
    strikes and wages lost to Australia's work force. Under his
                              .../4

                                     4.

       leadership of the A.C.T.U., wages lost through industrial
       disputes in Australia have doubled in two years, from $23 million 
       in 1969 to more than $45 million last year. Since 1967, the 
       figure has increased more than sixfold. The worker cannot be 
       expected to shoulder the consequences of such continued militancy.
             Abanconment of the aroitration system and adoption of such
       spectacular confrontation tactics injure the wage earner who is 
       called, out on strike or is stood down as a result of that strike.
•      At the same time, it sets back the national effort to improve 
       productivity, the only way that real wage increases and_ living 
       standard advances can be achieved.
             The Government refuses to see Australia's arbitration 
       system wrecked. We are committed to arbitration and the rule of 
       law as the best way of ensuring that industrial justice is done, 
       that the employee and employer both get a fair go, and that the 
       nation and all working people within it make genuine, material 
       progress in the years ahead.
•

       For further information: Collin Myers
                                Tel. Canberra 73 3261

