<!--start metadata-->
Title: The financial year
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 28/07/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                               By Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wrcnnon.                                                                                            3"TB             — 28th July,        3l st July                                THE FINANCIAL YEAR
                                                       Once again at 30th Tune the Federal Government makes up its 
accounts. The Govern= nt then finds out if revenue and expenditure have 
worked out as originally estimated.
                                                       That how close actual revenue gets to the estimates of twelve 
months earlier depends on all the variable things that Mom& affect trade
and business activity.                                                                                                       In this last year total revenue at £1,095,200,000 
was only £200,000 under the estimates. That makes the estimates pretty 
accurate when you take into consideration the huge amounts concerned.
                                                       Although actual revenue turned out to be almost exactly what 
had been estimated the sources of that revenue were in some ways quite 
different from what had been thought twelve months earlier. You will 
remember that in last year import restrictions had to be made more severe 
because of the adverse trade balance we had at that time. These increased 
restrictions were reflected in the Customs revenue for the last 12 months 
which was more then £11 million less than the estimates. On the other 
hand , after the last budget had been introduced export prices for many Jf 
our primary products rose, export loidisiSes were up and so total income 
tax was £8i million more than the Government expected. These are just two 
instances of how things, that occur during the year, can upset the original 
budget estimate.
                                                       On the expenditure side of the ledger. the Government's estimates 
were pretty close to the final figure. Money spent on Social Services was 
£223 million or £3 million short of the estimate. (It is worth urn 
noting that this is a fifth of our Federal Budget. If Repatriation 
expenses were added it would be more than a quarter.) In addition to this 
£2 million of the capital works money remained unspent.When the `treasurer announced the financial figures for the 
year early this month, most of the publicity was centred around the 
all million surplus revenue that the Federal Government had over its
expenditure.                                                                    Because of this, many organisations and groups of people 
have begun vigorous campaigns for reduced taxation. Industry in particular 
is making its voice heard. I don't know what the Treasurer is goint to 
say in his Budget speech at the end of =*zxm tk August - that must be 
kept one of the Nation's best kept secrets. Nevertheless I would not like 
to be too optimistic about tax cuts beoause of the following reasons.

                    OSI

There are may legitimate demands for increased expenditure by the 
Federal Government. Fox instance, an old age pension rise of 10/-
would cost £12 million. In addition to this, road building bodies are 
crying out for more money as every Shire Comciller knows. 'lso work 
may be begun standardising the Uelbourne Albury rail link. The Country 
Hospitals.' Associetion has also put up a strong case for an increase in 
the bed subsidy. These are all worthy causes, they would all require 
more money, they are all competing for the available resources. It would 
be difficult Uri reduce) taxes and answer these needs at the same time.
        Secondly, the Federal Government's supposed surplus of 
alimillion is not really a surplus at all. Twelve months ago the 
Treasurer budgeted for u surplus of SUS £308.5 million. At least
£100 million of this money was earmarked for the States at the beginning 
of the year. If it had not been, States capital programmes for hospitals 
and schiols for instance would have had to be drasticelly out.
         Each year there is a Premiers' conference at which the size 
of the States' works programmes is decided. Last rear the figure was 
£192 million. Tbsse works programmes used to be financed out of loan 
funds but in recent years State works programmes have increased to such 
an extent that there have not been anything like enough loan moneys 
available. So that our rapid development may continue the Federal 
Covernmeat has therefore subsidised State works programmes out of its on 
revenue. The Federal GoveanmenZ's surplus has been largely spent by the 
States for whom the money was earmarked from the very beginning.
        It we manage our personal accounts unwisely we affect only 
ourselves but if our national acoounts are badly managed the whole nation
suffers. t the present time Sir Arthur Fadden is preparing his Budget. 
His important task of measuring justice between all sections of the 
Commonwealth is not easy. I don't think it would hurt at this time if 
we wished him well.
24/7/57.
The subject of eek's article will be - Japanese Trade.

