<!--start metadata-->
Title: ANZUS treaty, defence
Description: Electorate talks
Date: 20/06/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                    EMBARGO: 5.00 PM


                     4.1 AUSTRALIA L‘'



             PRIME MINISTER


FOR MEDIA                      SUNDAY, 20 JUNE 1982


                    ELECTORATE TALK


This year's meeting of the ANZUS partners, which starts
tomorrow in Canberra, marks the 30th anniversary of the
ANZUS Treaty. These meetings are a valuable way of focussing 
our perceptions of current developments in the Asia Pacific 
region as well as the global situation. They also remind us 
of the close links which exist between Australia, New Zealand 
and the United States.

ANZUS is strongly supported by the vast majority of Australians. 
It has stood the test of time, and it is profoundly realistic 
in relation to Australia's strategic situation in the )980s. 
ANZUS protects Australia's vital interests; it secures 
Australia's sovereignty and independence; it demonstrates our 
willingness to play our part in achieving security for our 
region.
We live in an unpredictable world. Dangers can come out of 
apparently clear skies, as the Falklands crisis showed so 
plainly. If problems ever arose in our part of the world 
which we thought might become greater than we could master on 
our own account, it is the ANZUS Treaty which would stand as 
the guarantor of Australia's security, through the support of 
our alliance partners.

The ANZUS Treaty itself has two main parts. It requires its 
members to take action, both jointly and separately, by means 
of continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, to 
maintain their individual and collective capacity to resist
armed attack. Because of this emphasis on the importance 
of self-help, the expectation that the other partners will 
join in at a time of need is clearly bound up with each party 
taking measures on its own behalf to maintain its own security. 
In the second place, ANZUS provides for the alliance partners 
to consult together in times of emergency, if any of them sees 
threats in the Pacific to their territorial integrity, their 
political independence or their security.
The Australian Government is committed to building a strong and 
self-reliant defence force for Australia, designed to meet a 
wide range of possible contingencies in the years ahead. At the 
same time we are committed to firm alliance relationships,
based on the closest co-operation. Australia and the United

l


                               2 -


      States have long been involved in co-operation across a 
      wide range of common concerns, and that is a continuing process. 
      It is important to realize that ANZUS does not only operate 
      in emergencies or extreme situations, it has a day to day 
      relevance, as the basis of a working partnership.

      We see the partnership at work in joint exercises in the
      arrangements for B-52s to stage through Darwin, and in the
      visits of US naval ships to our ports. There have been more than
      330 visits to Australian ports by US naval ships in the
      last 10 years. The capacity for all United States ships
      without distinction to come to our ports is plainly valued by
      the United States. It contributes to strategic deterrence
      and it provides the kind of support that Australia would
      obviously want to give to allies. We also see the day-to-day
      partnership at work in Australia's access to US training
      schemes and technology andin the agreements which successive
      Australian Governments have entered into with the United
      States on joint facilities.

      One of the strengths of alliances and alliance arrangements 
      between free countries is that their terms and provisions need 
      to be acceptable to all parties, and in making particular 
      arrangeme~its on matters such as joint facilities, and B-52s 
      staging through Darwin and conducting low level navigation 
      flights over northern Australia, the Government has made 
      sure of preserving absolutely Australia's own sovereignty and 
      independence.

      I want to refer particularly to the joint facilities at Pine 
      Gap and Nurrungar, and to the naval communications station 
      at North-West Cape. Pine Gap and Nurrungar are joint
      facilities concerned with defence space research and 
      communications, together they form an important component of 
      the alliance between Australia and the United States, and
      as joint facilities Australia has full access to all 
      information passing through them.

      The North-West Cape Communications Station is a relay facility. 
      It does not initiate messages, but serves as one of the many 
      channels through which the US transmits messages to its forces. 
      One of its functions is a part of the nuclear deterrence
      system. It is a way of ensuring that information could always 
      be transmitted to submarines, even underwater, in the Indian 
      Ocean, and the effective deployment of deterrence is important 
      to Australia's security as it is to the security of all western
      countries. The North-West Cape facility, as a joint facility, 
      is used by Australia to transmit messages to our ships. I for 
      one would not have any overseas government interfering in the 
      messages we could send. And if we would not accept that for 
      our messages, how could we expect to dictate to the United
      States what messages it might transmit through these facilities?

r



              3


 Beyond its day-to-day relevance, ANZUS also has a wider 
 significance, for ANZUS is an important part of the web of 
 alliances and treaty arrangements which constitute the entire 
 Western Alliance. In the present world environment, the 
 western countries need to demonstrate a greater resolve and 
 commitment than ever in order to achieve world peace and 
 security,in order to preserve the freedom and the way of life 
 which we want to pass to our children.

 A stralg, stable ANZUS has a significant role to play in 
 demonstrating the commitment and resolve that are so
 necessary. As a nation, Australia stands fully behind ANZUS, 
 in support of these objectives.






            ---000---

