<!--start metadata-->
Title: Local Government, unions, Parliament, Labor Government
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 25/11/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    ~~. PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA
                                             PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES             CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2800 

                                             TEL. 721211















 FOR. IT12ORNù!'ii1I0N0~~' PlES;J GALLERY 
                                       a/T•ITA•~ GO : Sunday,


                                       25 Evember, 1973.










              ELEG C a uL 1 mE iE„ 1 Ur'4 1.i LE HON. M ;LG
               T4?                              ?JI 
                    g  ••      .                1 '7j) e









        _I. `have recently had an invitation to attend the 



 first meeting; of the Number Two Region which is being held 



 as a result of the regional proposals being put forward by



 the Commonwealth.  I have written to Local shires and 




 Piunicipalities asking for their comments on the document, "Regions" 



 setting; out the Government's attitude to those matters, and. 



 their reaction will be quite essential to me in forming my 



 own views on the Gdvernment's,proposals.





        The meeting being held in Warrnambool on the 29th 



 November will be a very important one. Parliament will be 



 sitting, but I will nevertheless try to get leave to attend



 it.





        I would also like to indicate general support for 




 the Minister for Labour, hr. Cameron's, objective in convening 



 a meeting of employees and employers to try to establish a



 better industrial climate.  Ever since T have had the job 



 of Opposition spokesman for Labour I have taken the view that 



 we need to defuse the industrial debate and take the political



heat out of industrial relations. 
                                  This is terribly important


 for all of us.'






        The Hamilton Chamber of Commerce has supported the



Minister's initiative, as I do. I Win. clad to see that the 



Minister has dskod Hr. Justice floore, the Chairman of the



Arbitration Commission, to chair the meeting. 
                                             I think it


is better than a politician doing the job. 
                                          Er. Cameron said 


earlier that he did not want too many politicians around 



and I am pleased to see he is following his own principle.





        I would have one criticism. 
                                    I believe the States



have a significant role in this area because they themselves 




are significant employers and many people work under State





                                                  •••//G

                                        2.

    industrial conditions.          If a conference is to achieve a
    better industrial climate, the States would need to be 
    involved.
              On behalf of the Opposition I have expressed the 
    hope that this conference will contribute to industrial peace. 
    It is certainly sorely needed.




              Over the last two weeks there has been a great deal
    of public concern about various events in Parliament.                  I
   'believe a great many people have a general view that Members of 
    Parliament should devote themselves to the business of
    Government and should forget personalities and the disputes 
    which arise over personalities.
              I agree with that view wholeheartedly, but it is 
    sometimes very hard to prevent the sort of dispute which
    received so much attention in recent days.               It only needs 
    one Member to make an intemperate and wild. statement about
    another to spark off a whole chain of events.                This is 
    basically what happened. •
              What•is quite remarkable in this recent occasion is
~   that the whole incident was sparked by the •Prime' Minister.
    It is easy to call to mind an occasion in an earlier capacity
    when the Prime Minister threw a glass of water at the
    Governor—General when he was a Member of the House of Representatives
    People expect the Prime Minister of Australia to behave with
    distinction, with courtesy and with a sense of decency.
    Above all, the Prime Minister should constantly try to lift
    the level of public debate, to raise the quality and calibre
    of Parliamentary discussion.           He can .best do this by setting 
    a high example, which in this area at least ou. ;ht to be beyond
              Unfortunately, I would not be at all surprised if       reproach,
    over the next two or three weeks of the Session before
    Parliament rises,          there are more unruly scenes with
    emotions being aroused.          The Government has been pushing 
    through an immense amount of legislation and the guillotine
    has been working over—time.           It has been chopping off debate 
    as freely as the original guillotine was used, to chop off 
    the heads of the French aristocracy.
                                                                               ..13

                         3.

       The kind of pressure being put upon the Opposition 
parties is tremendous. You have the situation in which very 
substantial legislation goes into the House; the Governnent 
will often have spent months examining and digesting the 
legislation; and the Opposition might be given as little 
as a week or less to form its total'view, to put itself in 
a position in which it can adeçuately respond in the Parliament. 
I am not saying we were not sometimes guilty of this in the 
Past, but I would like to think we tried to avoid it.
       Mr. Cameron was at pains to allow greater time for 
examination by the Opposition of his Conciliation and
Arbitration proposals.  As a result the Opposition moved
a number of amendments.  The Minister accepted many from
the House and ,many more when they were accepted by a majority 
in the Senate.
        I think that is an example of how Government and 
Opposition should work, each side recognising that both have
something to contribute to a particular problem. But when 
measures are being pushed through under the guillotine,
without debate, without discussion in Committee, the
Opposition is doubly frustrated by not even being able to put 
its View firmly and coherently.
        If Mr. Daly uses the guillotine much more often in 
the last tyro weeks of the Session, tension in the .Parliament 
is bound to arise again and there is not much that can be done 
to stop it.
        There are occasions when a Member
of the Opposition has to push the position in Parliament on 
a substantive point as hard as he possibly can, even if it 
does mean being named and being put out of the House for
24 hours.   This happened in the earlier week when Mr. Lynch
and myself both suffered that penalty. The Government was
pushing through legislation unreasonably. It had made a
mistake, and a serious mistake, over procedure. I was
seeking an explanation from the Speaker. I believe I was 
not allowed to put my .point clearly without interruption
and I was not given an answer.  I had thought the situation 
was so important that I had to push it to the ultimate, 
which I did.

        In this last week on similar Bills the .Government 
has been much more careful of the procedure that it follows 
and the same mistakes have not been made again.
        Perhaps some of the pressures can be emphasised by 
indicating that a normal Parliamentary day is 9.00 a.m. to 
12.00 midnight. As my Parliamentary colleague Tony Street
pointed out, you have 60 hours in 4 days of sittings.  This 
puts everyone under a good deal of pressure, a.nd electoral 
and Committee work take up all the non-sitting days.
Ministers also are under pressure because in addition to all 
this they have to run their own Departments.
        An important Bill was recently introduced concerning
Restrictive Trade Practices.  Adequate time was not given for
examination or discussion of this Bill.  Our speakers have 
made it clear that we support effective trade practice 
legislation as a means of encouraging greater competition. 
But we have, as we believe, the right to demand more time to 
debate a major Bill which will affect all business and
commerce in Australia.  A matter of this kind is too, 
important to be pushed through in'a• day or two.


















    •

