<!--start metadata-->
Title: Migration
Description: radio talk
Date: 17/11/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                               k~~ ^~~ ~ ~, --~-~ )1,
  ,
       Well over two million migrants have come to settle in this country since 
the end of World War II to assist in the tremendous task of development that is 
with us and lies before us for a long time to come. The problems of a great 
migration scheme, such as Australia's, are - apart from the sheer logistics of 
lifting large numbers of people from their homelands to transport them thousands 
of miles - essentially human. problems. There is the emotional wrench when a family 
or an individual pull up roots to leave their homeland. There is the task 
of finding accommodation and work in their new country. And there are the 
problems of adjustment to their new environment, to new social conditions, 
to fitting into what we call 'the Australian way of life'. The great immigration
flow has penetrated to practically all corners ofI tliftfite    .  There is
probably no one Australian-born who has not come into contact with one or more
of the new arrivals at some time or other. The fact that Australian-born residents
and migrants work shoulder to shoulder is an old story (as well as a continuing
one - we are seeking 160,000 migrants in 1968-69). So it is perhaps easy
to take our new settlers for granted, and to forget that they might be subject
to problems and pressures that do not beset those of us who were born here.
       The Government demonstrated in several ways this week that it is aware
of the continuing problems of migrants, and indicated its concern to eradicate
these troubles, and to open wider the gateways through which migrants pass to
become adjusted Australian citizens.
       One step proposed by the Government is to reduce, for many non-British
migrants, the period they now are required to reside in Australia before they
can qualify for Australian citizenship. At present this period is five years.
But under the proposed changes, a non-British migrant may seek citizenship after
three years' residence if he satisfied several requirements. One is that he or
she must be able to read and write English proficiently, as well as being able
to speak and understand it as normally required. He or she must in other
respects be      qualified for Australian citizenship.
       The Government did not feel there were reasons justifying steps for 
a general reductinn in the five-year qualifying period. But it felt strongly 
in the case of those non-British migrants who have a good command of spoken and 
written English, as well as demonstrating otherwise that they have fitted well 
into their new community. It must be remembered that an alien, as a non-citizen 
cannot vote. He cannot stand for Parliament. He has job disadvantages, and can 
miss promotion because he is not naturalised. In the public services and in 
local government, he cannot obtain permanent appointments. The new three year 
period will be a considerable help in overcoming these problems.















        D-)A,L-co

     2. •
     Legiliation to implement this and other Government decisions affecting 
     the welfare of migrants will be brought down next year. One of the decisio 
     is the plan for virtual automatic citizenship for migrants from other 
     Commonwealth countries. At present these settlers do not become Australian 
     citizens unless they apply for a Certificate of Registration. Whey must 
     have lived here for a year or morel= be of good character and meet other 
     requtiements. The Government now has decided to provide that migrants from 
     other Commonwealth countries who have lived here for five years should 
     be able to become Australian citizens by simply notifying the MX Immigrat- 
     ion Department of their wish to become citizens. Already, of course, 
     British migrants coming here have the right to vote, or to be appointed 
     or elected to public office, etc. Out many do not know that without 
     actually becoming an Australian citizen, they cannot obtain an Australian 
     passport on going abroad, and must take a British passport.
IThe changes will underline the word "Australian" in reference to the 
     status of the Australian citizen. In the Act---to be renamed the "Austral- 
     ian Citizenship ;c-t"---it is proposed to insert a provision to the effect 
     that whenever Australians are required to taLe their national status, it 
     will be suffic±ent to state "Australian citizen" rather than 'British
                        X‘4"ey° •4 et fr
     Another way in which the Government is seeking to smooth out the problems 
     of migrants ìsby assisting in endeavours to overcome the 
     English language difficulties encountered by migrant children in our 
     schools. My Department of Education and Science is co-operating with 
     the N.S.W. Department of Fducation and the Immigration Department in 
     an investigation into this problem. This survey seeks to ascertain the 
     extent to which'iiir language difficulties prevent migrant children from 
     reaching their full'iii;iioential in the schoolroom. Earlier this
     year a survey was made                                   in government and non-government primary 
     and secondary schools in NSW and in Canberra to find out the total 
     number of migrant children and 3s4ele- how many of them were experiencing
     language difficulties.                                                                                  We are trying to
     find the best methods of providing English teaching for these young 
     migrants. 4=mwMPIPArThe second part of the survey is now under way and 
     results will be combined with earlier results in an attempt to work out 
     a policy for dealing with the problem.
     It is sobering to consider tne kmma*eK havoc should modw animal killer 
     diseases such as foot-and-mouth ever-gAiimo4efo40e*Itt ,ein entry to 
     Australia.
     For instance, Australia's $1000 million export trade in animal products 
     would be in jeopardy. Our main meat markets, in the U.S. and Japan, would 
     close up as soon as the disease struck here.
     This topic was discussed during the week by Dr. A.E. Pierce, Chief of 
     the CSIRO Division of Animal Health, in an address •to the CSIRO Advisory 
     Council in Sydney. He said the privileged position of the Australian 
     livestock industries in relation to diseases rampant in illrginiffiilt
   .4thiiiiipmer, Europe, Africa and Asia was due largely to Australia's Quaran-                            CZ,4•, 0-o• t.,,e4,1 v4-4
        Line Act of 1908 and the measures supervised by theeept of Health.

               3.

•              Modern means of communication and increasing international traffic 
               have brought grater risk of exotic animal diseases entering this country. 

               P`ircraft are faster, passenger numbers are rising, and so greater 
               pressures are brought to bear on ship and airline terminals. Most of
               the 22                                                      bad                                   livestock diseases in other countries are virus 

               infections and could enter in contaminated clothing, in animal products,
               packing materials, or even footwear.                                                                                                                                                                           Incineration at 

               airports and xelween seaports must be completely efficient. There are 
               other mafWroutes that the deadly killer diseases can travel. Insects, 
               travelling at great heights, and possibly migratory birds, could                                                      r'
               carry viruses into this country. Atm Some types of sandfly identical to
               those in Australia have been found                                                                                                                         in other countries to be carriers 

               of the bluetongue disease, capable of devastating sheep and cattle 
               populations. Scientists have now isolated seven strains of foot-and-mouth 
               virus and. 19 strains of bluetongue virus. We can never relent in the war 
               against these diseases which are still spreading from country to country.
               Fôr instance,                                                                                         bluetongue has spread into Europe and the
               U.S.A., and'Aiknam:oLitbr ks of African wine fever are occurring in Italy. which
               Foot-and-mouth disease ecttally entered Australia in 1872, rinderpest in

               1926, Newcastle disease in 1930 and 1932, were finally eradicated, as
               was the outbreak of swine fever in 1961.                                                                                                                          The eradication of the recent

               foot-and-mouth outbreak in ttmet Britain cost about 7330 million, it 
               was authoritatively reported.
               Dr.                               Pierce • said he believed there was a growing awareness of 

               danger to primary industry in Australia, and he considered that a special 
               maximum security laboratory was a vitally important facility for this 
               country. Such a laboratory could enable scientists to make early isolatio5 

               identification and diagnosis of a virus, and speed the production of a 
               vaccine. the laboratory, he believed, could also investigate the
               possible susceptibility of native animals to                                                                                                                                         foreign diseases and 
               the question whether they could prove to be hosts for the diseases.

