<!--start metadata-->
Title: Disarmament
Description: press statement
Date: 6/05/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   ~ wSS STAT%i MIT :

  Malcom Fraser


                                                                                                                                      Hay 6th,1962


                                                                           Disarment 

                                            Recently, Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister for external
   Affairs, made a statement about Disarmament This statement covered, 
   amongst other things, an answer to a request from the United Nations 
   asking under what conditions Australia would renounce either the use 
   of nuclear weapons or the stationing of such weapons on Australian 
   soil for use by other countries.

                                           The general text of the Australian reply was that the 
   Australian. Government could not bind the Australian people to a set 
   of circumstances which may or may not arise in the future; that while 
   the Government loathes the thought of the use of nuclear weapons it
   cannot renounce their use in all circumstances.               However, Sir Garfield 
  pointed out that Australia did not possess nuclear weapons, nor were 
   any stationed on our soil , nor was there any intention to do so. 
  This, in the crudest terms, summarises what Sir Garfield said but his
• long statement in the Parliament has once again given rise to a 
  controversy.

                                           There are people who say that unilaterally and by 
  ourselves we should show our devotion to the cause of peace by
  renouncing the use of such weapons                         I only wish that such a view 
  was a correct one and that we could serve the cause of peace by such
  an action.                           Unfortunately, the whole course of history argues 
  against it.

                                           The Western free powers believe that the only way 
  they can maintain their freedom in the face of Communist expansion, 
  an expansion which has captured hundreds of millions of people since 
  1945, is to maintain our own strength so that we can argue from
  strength. We do this in two ways - by maintaining a certain level 
  of conventional forces and, secondly, by possession of the nuclear 
  deterrent in the hands of the United Kingdom and the United States.

                          Because our economy is geared to a much higher 
  standard of life than Soviet economy; because our manpower is 
  considerably less, our conventional forces arealniost, by definition, 
  going to be gravely outnumbered by the Soviet forces, especially if
  you throw the Chinese into the ring.                                                                    We should recall that
  Chinese leaders have repeatedly said that they have no fear of a 
  nuclear war or of war of any kind because they believe such war with 
  the free powers to be inevitable before the final victory of Communism 
  arrives.

          The Chinese might think in this way because even if 
  they lost 300 million of their own people there would still be
  enough left. They are increasing at the rate of 16 million a year.

                                           The only way that the free powers can maintain the 
  balance is by possession of the nuclear deterrent - by making it known
  that there are circumstances under which it will be used, but if there 
  is to be a full clash of arms, which-we all pray will never happen, 
  then the knowledge held by the Soviet powers that we will use the 
  deterrent is, perhaps, the best guarantee that it never will be used.




                                                                                                                                                              /2.

              There are various countries which have tried to break 
 away from the power blocs from the East or from the West and to strike
 a neutralist attitude. By so doing, such countries do not mean that
 they won't fight under any circumstances.  Indeed, India was quite 
 prepared to use arms to capture Goa, a former Portugese possession. 
 So to say that a country is neutral in this great struggle that 
 threatens the world does not mean that there are no circumstances
 under which that country will use force. Indonesia might describe 
 herself as neutral between East and West, but she said quite plainly 
 that, if necessary, she will use force over West New Guinea.

However, even if we were to accept the neutralist 
argument that we should, as an example, renounce the use of these 
weapons, we should be quite sure that we knew exactly where we 
were going.

              In 1914 and in 1919 there were many Australians who 
fought to preserve freedom and even though our contribution in 
terms of numbers might have been small, our contribution in terms
of courage and acts of valour was great.    The people who then 
fought, fought because they believed Australians as a nation and as 
individuals should take some part in maintaining freedom when free-
dom was threatened as it then was on a world scale.  If we now 
accepted the neutralist argument, if we forsook the use of nuclear 
weapons in all circumstances, then this means we are saying to the 
United Kingdom and to the United States We are no longer prepared
to play a full part in maintaining our own freedom.   It is all
right for you to do it but count us out.  We won't help. That 
is, in fact, what such a declaration would mean.

             I don't , think anyone who did fight in the two provious  
world wars would feel very happy if the present generation of
Australians took this attitude.  Ue must be prepared to play our
part.   Indeed, our own survival depends upon it.  All Australians 
recognise that we cannot defend ourselves on our own strength. tie 
have not the resources nor the manpower, therefore our continued 
security depends upon the possession of powerful friends who, in the
interests of freedom, believe we are worth saving.  They will only 
think this if they have a sure knowledge that we are determined to 
play our own part in our own defence and that we are not shoving 
responsibility off on to somebody else's shoulders.

Having said all this, I want to emphasise that controlled disarmament 
is quite clearly one of the most important 
objectives that lie before us but at each stage of disarmament 
it must be possible for each country to verify that the other side
has kept to its agreement.  when disarmament is accomplished it 
must be possible for each side to know that the other side is
keeping to the agreement.  This can only be done if there is
adequate inspection and, so far, the Soviet Union has rigidly refused 
to agree to an inspection which will in any way satisfy the security 
and freedom of the ilest.

              In the 17 stormy years since the last war I think we 
can say without fear of contradiction that it is only the West's 
strength and determination that has prevented a real conflict. If 
the West had not at all times shown determination, the appetite of 
the Communist powers might have become voracious that we would have 
been forced into action ill-prepared and ill-eeuipped.

              There are many people who can remember the history of
the 1930's.   If the German Dictator had been stopped in the early 
stages of his career, the history of this century might have been


                                                           /3.

very different.   He was not stopped in the early stages because
nobody had the power to prevent him and all the United Kingdom 
Prime Minister could do was to come back with a piece of paper
from Munich.  If Mr.Chamberlain  had been in a position to argue 
very strongly, if the British forces at that time had been well 
prepared the second great war might have been prevented. The 
United Kingdom was not prepared, with the results that we all know.
The free world learnt a lesson from this. The United Kingdom, 
the United States, we in Australia and others know that until 
there is controlled disarmament we cannot afford to be weak.

