<!--start metadata-->
Title: Footrot
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 14/03/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    cA,---c7,

Tonieht Itent to pPy s few words about Yootrot. Reoently Demers have 
beeome -mmeth more sonscious of this disease and of tee neeessity of
gettinf rid of it. m. c4         is doing everyteine possible to help 
 spreed knowledge end awe .11ssiti of the die. These schools of inetrutt izrn
 hive visited eeed=esmeggett,     Vevey Cesterton, Aenhopoo, Macerther 
end Elnahurst.

 :e all km» thet the dise se attacks e certein pfrt of a sheves hoof, 
we knoe thet tha germ is extremely virulent end that under conditions 
of w&rm moist posture it sen spread rapidly cousins ere-A, deenee to 
the flock. he know thet the germ ear live for e maximum of only two 
weeks in tee paddock/I under the most favourable condition.. If un 
eree is emptied of sheep for thet time it will be free of footrot. 
however the germ een lie dorment in a sheep's hoof for a very lone 
time being ready to break out when the right conditions occur. it is 
the presence axed detection of such carriers that eeees 'absolute cure 
 so ditficult.

Yeotrot control has number one priority amongst les=eevi-weescientists 
but it is unlikely that any uesy cure will be found. erobe prineipels 
of control have been developed, the hoof must be pared anat./waled 
with disinfectant erd ones exposed the germ is easily killed, but 
the perm suet be exposed end thete where hand work comes in. eecature 
used eor paring should be eleaned between sheep uhie h matt should
all be put threueh a toot bath of formelin or blueetone ,,bdistely 
efter paring and affected sheep eerie-Asia/1y thete,after. Infected sheep 
muet be iselated. bere pessible sheep teet have been treated should 
be returned to clean pedeocks.

Iwo types of sheep oredle helm reaently been put on the merket. ehere 
is a einele sheep unit for smeller properties end e larger mindless 
Ilea maceine thEt holds four sheep at a time where larger number, 
are to be treated. eerly in the yeer before feet have beeome hard it 
Is possible for four men to treat te0q.sheep a day with this lent 
machine. leis would be an impossible target for four men without the 
sheep cradle. ehe single sheep unit can be used t the end of ener race. 
It cuts out all the hand physical work and makes it possible for one 
man to do ens bundres end fifty sheep in en average del,. This is 
agvin en imposeible tereetby the old method of dreeging seep out of 
a ceteeing 00A.

Althoufh the feats of fiotrot are bomon knowledge few of us reelise tee 
reel cost that tee disease causes the nation. many people are content 
with periodic treatment when the diieese is bad. euch treetment is a 
recurring exPense, which while the disease remains will never end.

That tee disease can be eradicated has been proved but it bee only been 
done on teose farms tht,tt halm given the Job of ftotrot cure number 
one priority. euch people have found that intense effott over *honer 
periods of time is cheaper and mole, beneficiel than periodic attacks 
that servo only to eontrol end not to ours.

There are wiry difficultiee in Footrot oure. Reculmr sep wort must• 
be continued, &leeriest haymaking, crutchIng and lembing all come et 
times when footrot measures may be repeired. These oteer jobs often meee 
it impoesible to get to a mob until maw sheep have been affected 
making treatment and mire mor • difeicult.

Farmers veo are free of feetrot are continually on the watch.
 ravelling sheep can leave the Needs Inflected and sinew any farms 
extend on both sidoe of the roads sheep crossing than can pick up tee 
marg. it has beien puegested teat feotrot should be made a notifieb/e 
dieeese end altoege 41-4 rcleent of Ø. enreire would probably 045
impossible sod t2;:                              stin..,tne man
who mas footrot Intl     imtonsilv action, for while etel disease 
remains active in any area there is a great danger of it being spreed 
by trevelling sheep. footret cure deservee our constent and undLvkehd 
attettion. hile we are hoping for further help from theelieeleerTit 
the moment the only permanent cure comes as a result of herd eork 
and care.

