<!--start metadata-->
Title: Dairy industry policy
Description: press statement
Date: 13/05/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                           VVt3`r-! THE: ú0MP1 EME1TS OF
                                             MALCOLM FRASER





 RADIO TALK                                  WEEK ,E,_ND ING l nth MAY,'„ 1_ _ 962 .

                          DAIRY INDUSTRY POLICY.

         Last week the Parliament passed three measures which are of 
 great importance to Australia's Dairy Industry. I think the Industry 
 should be very greatly encouraged from the view that the Government 
 has taken and should now be in a position to look with greater con- 
 fidence to the future despite what may happen as a result of the 
 United Kingdom almost certainly entering into the Common Market. 
 I say this because the Government in announcing a new 5-year 
 stabilisation plan has made significant changes which are certainly 
 to the Industry's advantage.

         Under the old Stabilisation Schemes, the Government announced 
 the amount of subsidy that it would be prepared to make available
 shortly before the,beginning of each year, thus, from  one year to the 
 next the industry did not really know how much'Government money 
 would be available. Now the Minister has said quite categorically, 
 that the Government subsidy of £132M. will not be reduced during the 
 course of the next 5-year Stabilisation Plan. This should be encourag- 
 ing to dairy farmers. In addition to this, an additional bounty has 
 been arranged for factories that export dried milk products. Because 
 of changed marketing conditions overseas, companies like Glaxo that 
 exported a major part of their product were finding themselves in 
 very real difficulty. Countries overseas were either experiencing 
 their own exchange problems or had increased their own production 
 to a level at which they no longer needed Australian imports.

         Australian dried milk processors who had foreseen this 
 development and who had withdrawn from the overseas markets and 
 concentrated on the home market were not greatly affected by these 
 moves. Companies such as Glaxo, on the other hand, who depended 
 very largely on the export market, were in an almost impossible 
 position. Various possibilities were examined. At one time, it 
was thought that dried milk processors should be brought within the 
 general Stabilisation and Equalisation arrangements. However, it 
was found that this would not work because the companies who were 
 selling almost their entire product on the Australian market at a 
profit were not prepared to equalise their returns with companies 
who were experiencing marketing problems in overseas markets. As all 
dairy farmers would know, the Equalisation arrangements and the 
Stabilisation Plans depend largely upon the voluntary arrangements 
to which all butter factories agree. The dried milk processors who 
had concentrated their product on the Australian market were unwilling 
to take part in an equalisation of the proceeds from all dried milk 
products. It was clear therefore that a different arrangement would 
have to be made to assist the exporting section of this industry.

         Different arrangements have now been made and this will 
involve a possible Government subsidy of about £350,000. This is 
additional to the £132M. that I previously mentioned. As I understand 
it, the subsidy will work in this way. Those companies that export 
will be given an export bounty for dried milk products up to about 
£62 a ton. There is a reserve fund within the industry itself which 
could increase this sum if the industry wished to do so but the 
Government bounty will be up to £62 a ton.

         There are important reasons for this decis' n. If it had not 
been taken there would have been real difficulty n certain areas
such as around Port Fairy where many supply Glaxo for 
their dried milk production which goes for export. If Glaxo's dried 
milk factory had to close down there would be hardship not only to 
factory employees but also to such producers. Ultimately their 
production would almost certainly go to butter factories for production 
into butter and cheese. If this happened there would be a larger 
number of farmers sharing in the £132M. subsidy. Therefore it was in

               -2-

the interests of the general body of the industry to make sure that the 
dried milk processors should remain in operation in a satisfactory 
economic state. In addition to this, such processors earn about £8M. 
a year in overseas funds and this is a valuable contribution to our 
export earnings.

    It is for these general reasons that the Government has 
decided to make the additional subsidy of £350,000 available.

    Other arrangements which had been introduced in the latter 
stage of the old Stabilisation scheme are going to be continued. 
One of the most important to dairy farmers is the interim guarantee 
or under-writing. The Commonwealth introduced this system in 1958. 
The purpose of the under-writing is to make it possible for the 
Equalisation Committee to authorise higher initial payments than it 
otherwise would. Because the Equalisation Committee is dealing with 
several unknowns in the course of a year namely the volume of 
production; the extent of local consumption; the amount of butter 
for export and the price that will be received on the London market 
it must be conservative in its original estimate. Because it is deal- 
ing with these unknowns and because it cannot run the risk of running 
out of money, the interim price has to be a conservative one. At 
one stage it got as low as 36d. or 37d. So that it could make a 
higher interim price available to farmers, late in 1958, the Government 
said: "We will under-write the payments of the Equalisation Committee 
up to 40d." This kind of under-writing is being continued in the new 
Stabilisation Scheme. The level for the forthcoming year will be 
fixed at 40d. For the subsequent years, the under-writing figure 
will be announced before each season begins.

    Another measure was also introduced with these general arrange- 
ments which will involve an increased charge on the industry. In 
1924, a levy was originally imposed on the industry to finance the 
Australian Dairy Produce Board. The legislative authority to increase 
this levy had not been introduced since that time. The initial levy 
was less than the maximum allowed by law but early in the 1951: the 
levy was raised to the maximum under the law. Since this time, the 
costs accruing to the Australian Dairy Produce Board have increased 
very greatly and in the last year or two it has been spending more money 
than it has been receiving in income. The Government, after a request 
from the industry, introduced legislation which will enable these 
charges on butter and cheese to be increased thus the Dairy Industry 
is making its own efforts to look after its future by seeing that 
it is prepared to spend quite large sums of money on marketing which 
will assist its own product. These increased charges only apply to 
butter and cheese exported.

    The new operative rates will be one-quarter of a penny per 
pound on butter and one-eighth of a penny per pound on cheese exported. 
The responsibility of marketing Australian butter and cheese overseas, 
in addition to some other dairy products, rests with the Australian 
Dairy Produce Board. The levy on butter and cheese exported will be 
to cover the expenses of this Board.

    I think this willingness on the part of the Industry to do 
what it can to help itself might have been one of the reasons that 
motivated the Government not only to maintain the subsidy of £132M. 
for the following five years but also to give an additional subsidy 
to the dried milk processors who export their product.

