<!--start metadata-->
Title: 1957-1958 Budget
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 7/09/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                              311A - 7/9/57 
                                              3YB 10/9/57
                  MAlCOLM PItMER, MEMBER FOR witNNON 
                           comaants on the 
                            1957-58 BUDOLT
                        mossommoorsioammowarmalso, 

         Last week, the Treasurer introduced his Tenth Budget.

I believe it was a good one. I.hen we examine a Budget, we have got 

to look at it in relation to the time und to the economic position 

that prevailed when it was introduced.

         Last year, the Budget, together with the Little Budget, 

had beJn designed to curb inflation and to prevent it getting worse. 

This year, inflationary forces have eased and the demand is not

quite so pressing in many spheres as it then was. Indeed, with 

22.000 people in receipt of unemployment benefits, the Government's 

view has beau that ; little extra stimulus in those places which

need it most is what the economy needs at this time The Budget 

gives this stimulus.

         Very briefly I will outline the aain points in the Budget 

and in laterreportsI will discuss the whys and the whorefors in 

greater detail.

         War and Repatriation pensions and service have been 

increased. For instance, the special rate war pension for total 

and permanent incapacity has been increased by 85/e per week to £11. 

Other pensions have also been increased. Total expenditure on these 

services in 1957/58 will be £129 million.

         Under the Social Services fund, old age and invalid 

pensions have been increased by 7/6d. per week. Unemployment and 

sickness benefit rates have been increased by 15/- a week for a 

single adult and by 22/6d. a week for a man and wife, bringing the 

weekly rates to £3/5/0 and £5/12/6 per week.

         Government allowances to hospital patients have also ben 

increased where those patients are insured in some hospital insurance 

organisation.

         In all, the increased benefits under Repatriation and 

Social Services will cost US £20 million in a full year. Total 

expenditure on Social Services in tbis year will be £243 million 

in addition to the £129 million spent on repatriation.

                  s for the s e4 is goiim to be increased. 
                 n will be taa million more than last year.
       Pays nts to the States undo. Commonwealth aid Roads
1e , .ati.on will be increased by about £a million und in arid., itlon 
to this, a grant cf £3 million will bo made for road building 
based on a tax on diesel fuel used by diesel road users. I will
explain this position in detail in e later talk. irimery producers 
and industry will not have to pay the diesel tax.
       The Governmeat has agreed in principle to beginning the 
standardisation of the .bourne--Albury rail link mud discussions 
will begin with the respective State Governments to work out the
details.
       An extra £5 million, bringing the total to 235million,
      allocated to War Service homes. This should make the 
waiting list for outstanding applicants much shorter than it has 
been in the past.
       The Immigration target of 115 thousand people is remaining
the sane and the Defence Budget of £190 million will be the same
as last year This is far lass than is spent per head of population 
by either Hugleud, Canada or the United States and I believe it is 
cheap enough insurance for the security of this country.
       In addition to these increased grants from the Government,
there have been zany taxation concessions which may seem essaaall 
in themselves but which in actual fact total many millions of pounds. 
Dependants' allowances have been increased by £13 for each dependant, 
 a concession whieh will Bost tSj million to a full year.
       C o m pa n y tmxati© has been reduced by M. in the pound, 
 and you will reMamber in the Little Budget of two Autumns ago, 
 Company taxation had been increased by 1%- in the pound. Sixpence 
 of this shilling has been taken oft:
       In addition to this, Depreciation A33.owawes for end+ atry 
 be been very greatly increased. Those two points will give a

stimulus to industry and, consequox tly, to enjoyment 
Depreciation .'.11awsnces in part:iculnr will enòourago industry to 
replace out-dated equipment and will thus help to keep our 
led uetrios modern and competitive.
        Sales Tax on may items has bean reduced. especially on 
household furniture and equipment such as rofrigeratoss and 
vacuum cleaners. ales Tax on travel goods and handbags has been 
reduced from Z5% to l2
        Eaployera who pay less than ,400 in wages
henceforth, be exempt from, i ro11 Tax.
        These, in the broad, are the main concessions given by 
the Budget, concessions which in all total about 277 al ion.
        I believe we should all be ena uraged b what we heard 
from the Treasurer last reek. Extra grants and extra assistance 
has been given where it is most needed and , at the sane t Lae, 
taxation concessions over a wide field should do a great deal to 
stimulate fur the r activity Sn t Le industrial sphere and, at the 
same tins, should lessen the burden of taxation on the feebly 
which is, after all, the foundation of our oom uni t:y and d our 
nation.
        In later reports I wi ll discuss different aspects of the 
Budget in detail.


bf Sif 1 57.

