<!--start metadata-->
Title: Changes in Social Services payments
Description: press statement
Date: 9/10/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT                                   October 9th,1959
MALCOLM FRASER
                The last Budget made considerable changes in the Social 
Services payments. I thought you may be interested in this especially 
as over the last three weeks there has been a great deal of speculation 
in the press about certain measures which have been suggested to the 
Government.
                The main change is the increase of 7/6d. a week in age, 
invalid and widows pension. This cost €12.7 million yearly. This brings 
the maximum rate of pension to £4.15.0. a week or to £5.5.Od, a week 
for those single pensioners who qualify for the rent allowance* There 
are other comparative changes that have been made throughout the whole 
sphere and scope of Social Services and Repatriation payments. I would 
like to point out that a married couple, both receiving the pension 
and both either earning in part—time employment or by way of annuity 
the maximum permissible income, can now qualify for a total weekly income
of £16,10.0,d. This is , of course, free of tax. It is well worth 
making a comparison of this rate with somebody on the basic wage who 
may well have a young family with the consequent heavy financial 
responsibilities. A pensioner couple would be extremely unlikely tohave 
any dependant children and, therefore, those who do receive this 
maximum rate can be said to be considerably better off than a married 
man on the basic wage who, at the same time, is trying to raise a family,
                However, it would be idle to assume that all pensioners 
come into this happy category. No one can deny that the lot of a single 
pensioner who pays rent is anything but difficult, but the Government 
in making changes in pension increases has had to take account of the 
overall Budgetary position and allocate what funds it can to Social 
Services. However, I don't want anyone to think that Social Services 
and National Welfare are in any way regarded as a poor Cinderella when 
it comes to the question of the Federal Budget. In this year Social 
Services and National Health cost £300 million, while Repatriation will 
cost a further £136 million; the toyal being £436 million.
                During debates on Social Services there is a common 
practice of comparing the rates of pension now payable with the rates 
of pension payable before the Government came to office in 1949.

                2
During the debate the Minister quoted figures to show that the rate 
of increase in pension had been greater than the increase in the 
cost of living indicates, thus showing that the pension paid is 
larger in real terms by 15/4d. than the one previously paid in 
1949, However, this kind of comparison is very largely superficial 
and ignores the greatest change in the lot of the pensioner which 
has ever been introduced, and that is the pensioner hospital and 
medical service and the pensioner pharmaceutical service. Under 
these services, introduced by the present Government, pensioners 
are entitled to free medical treatment of every kind. Since 
pensioners are of an age when they are likely to need medical 
attention this obviously means much more to them than a small 
increase in pension. An increased pension of 20.10.0, or ,even 
£l. a week would by no means cover the cost for a pensioner who 
is ill and who needed constant medical attention. Under the 
provisions that exist a sick pensioner has no need for worry or 
for care. This must surely help relieve one of the greatest 
burdens from old people.
     The Social Service legislation included one vital change. 
For the first time all aborigines, except nomadic tribes of no 
fixed address, will be entitled to full social service benefits. 
This is the first time in sixty years that the Commonwealth had 
exhibited sufficient energy to sweep away the restrictions that 
prevented this. These were largely of a constitutional nature. 
Aborigines were not qualified for benefits until they were 
specifically exempted from State Law governing native welfare. 
The Bommonwealth action is one that should be hailed by all 
sympathetically minded people,
      You will have seen in the papers where various 
Government members were reported to be strongly agitating for 
changes in the means test. I think everyone agrees that the 
position is not perfect and at a later time I will report on this 
subject only because it is extremely controversial, and one on 
which people legitimately hold different points of view. The 
only point I want to make now is this — the Government had made
its Budget and framed its financial proposals in detail. The

             ~ 3

 The time to get these important changes introduced is before the 
 Budget abd not after it. No Government of whatever Party could, 
 in fact, accept a major change in its Budget without recasting 
 many other items which would be related to it. Therefore, the 
 right time to try and get changes of an important nature introduced 
 is in the Autumn Session of Parliament and not in the Spring 
 Session after the Budget has been brought down. Therefore, I 
 particularly welcome the Prime Minister's statement that the 
matters would be fully reviewed well before the framing of the 
 next Budget begins.

