<!--start metadata-->
Title: Tariff policy, ministerial changes
Description: Radio talk
Date: 2/05/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                              ZiAt-4 . -7/s/7.
     Sunday 2 May
     Thursday 6 May



             Today I want to talk about three things - 

       firstly about a statement on tariff policy made by the 

       Minister for Trade & Industry, Mr. Anthony; secondly 

       on a bill introduced by the Prime Minister, Mr. McMahon, 

       for the extension of the Ministry by one; and thirdly, 

       I want to mention the Prime Minister's proposal to 

       appoint Assistant Ministers.


       Tariff Policy
             You will be aware that for a good while there 
got    has been considerable discussion about the level of the 

       tariff. On the one side many have argued that the

       tariffs are generally too high and that thus the costs 

       of production for primary producers and others is forced 

       unnecessarily high. There are others who have argued 
       that protection has been necessary to enable our

       industries to expand.

             In the few months since he has had his new 

       portfolio Mr. Anthony has given a great deal of attention 

•      to this problem, and the statement he made this week in 
       the Parliament gives the Government's decisions in the 

       matter. The Tariff Board will be free to conduct a review 

       of the tariff as it thinks fit. The review will be 

       systematic. The tariff has broadly been divided into high, 

       medium and low levels of protection.

             The Board considers that those industries that 

       have comparatively high cost of production are those where 

       the effective rates of protection are greater than 50%; 

       the middle area will be those industries which require a 

       protection between 25% and 50%, and those with low cost of 

       production will require an effective rate of less than 25%.

                 2.


         In the high cost area the Board has said 
     that subject to non-economic considerations, which, 
     for example, may be the importance of an industry for 
     defence purposes, its recommendations will at least 
     aim to contain industries with unduly high levels of 
     protection and to encourage those that can exist 
     profitably with low levels of protection.

         The Minister announced that the Board's 
•    suggestion that the review should begin with those 
     industries in the high cost area has won general 
     acceptance. Machinery and manufacturers of metal 
     have been nominated by the Board as the first two 
     areas to be reviewed. It should be noted that many 
     of the tariffs have not been reviewed since the 1930's 
     or even the 1920's, and thus there is a tremendous 
     task ahead of the Tariff Board.

         You may ask why could not all tariffs be 
     reduced by a certain flat level and thus make industry 
i    more competitive, with lower costs. This would be too 
     blunt a weapon. In examining the tariff, the level of 
     protection must be examined on an industry by industry 
     basis and this requires a review in each case.

         I want to warn people against expecting too 
     much from this review too quickly. Primary producer 
     organisations have been pushing for a review of the 
     tariff. They believe their costs would be lower if the 
     tariff were lower. In many cases this is true. However, 
     a systematic review will take a long while. The other

                3

     pressures in the community for increases in costs, 
     especially in the wage area, will remain. While I 
     expect this review to have a helpful effect, I do 
     not expect it to lead to any dramatic reductions 
     in costs for primary producers. It may mean little 
     more than that costs will rise slower than would 
     otherwise have been the case.

     Ministers of State Bill
         The Prime Minister introduced legislation 
     to extend the Ministry by one member. Three matters 
     prompted the Prime Minister to take this course. The 
     Prime Minister wanted one Minister to be able to 
     concentrate exclusively on the discharge of Common- 
     wealth responsibilities in the fields of Aboriginal 
     Affairs, the Arts and the Environment; secondly, the 
     Prime Minister believes that there would be 
     administrative advantages in placing general service 
•    functions in the hands of one Minister and Department; 
     and, thirdly, many of the responsibilities of the new 
     portfolio had previously been undertaken by the Prime 
     Minister directly, thus reducing the time which he 
     could usefully spend on major matters of domestic and 
     international policy. There are two main advantages 
     in these changes. The first is to give one Minister 
     particular responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs, the 
     Arts and the new Office of the Environment. These 
     matters are all of particular importance. Bill

                 4.

     Wentworth has been an energetic Minister for Aboriginal 
     Affairs, but his major responsibility has been in the 
     field of Social Services. Matters in the environmental 
     field are also causing increasing concern to many
     people in Australia, and this aspect of the new Department's 
     work is bound to assume greater importance in the future. 
     The second is to free the Prime Minister for the main 
     business of Cabinet and Government.

•    Assistant Ministers
         The last thing I want to mention on this oc- 
     casion is the Prime Minister's proposal to appoint 
     Assistant Ministers. He said that this will be done in 
     the recess. You need not worry that it will mean that 
     more Ministers are going to be paid Ministerial salaries. 
     The Prime Minister pointed out that Section 44 of the 
     Constitution will not permit payment of any salary to an 
     Assistant Minister over and above his salary as a Member 
•    of Parliament. The proposal will, however, assist senior 
     Ministers, especially in some of the administrative aspects 
     of their work, and allow them to concentrate more fully on 
     policy. Perhaps more important, it will afford a larger 
     number of newer Members of Parliament an insight into the 
     machinery of Government and the way Government operates. 
     A Member who has had this experience would find the 
     transition to Minister's rank very much easier.

