<!--start metadata-->
Title: Outlook for the future - economic position
Description: press statement
Date: 21/06/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATii T         June 21st,1959
MALCilM FRAS,ETY
        This will be my final talk for some weeks, I will be 
on the air again as soon as Parliament meets early in August.
        Recent evidence makes it possible to give this final 
talk on a note of optimism. There are several things that give 
encouragement for the future.
        The first of these may well be the recovery in 
Australian overseas balances throughout the second half of this 
financial year. From July to December of last year Australia had 
a deficit of £20 million, before the end of Iay this year this 
deficit of £20 million had been turned into a surplus of :6 million.
        The recovery in wool prices would have male some 
contribution to this, but even so we must remember that early this 
year, in January and February, wool prices reached their lowest 
levels for several years. Despite this Australia's general trading 
position is a reasonably satisfactory one.
        Secondly, the grounds for confidence in the future
are increased by the overseas position. At this time last year 
several overseers countries, including the United States and countries 
in Europe, were coming to grips with a noticeable recession; the 
United States in particular had a considerable degree of unemployment. 
Throughout the course of this year there have been marked signs 
of recovery in overseas countries and this, no doubt, is one of the 
principal reasons also why we saw a lift in wool prices in the weeks 
since Easter.
       Mary people in Australia have not felt the effects 
    overseas recession. Many Australians have been quite unaware 
that it was taking place and very few Australians have been affected 
by it in their personal dealings and transactions.
       There is one notable exception to this; the wool- 
growers have taken pretty well the full brunt of the overseas 
recession in its effect on Australia. This has led, in many cases, 
to reduced activity and reduced demands in many rural areas.
       Thirdly, there are further grounds for confidence 
in Australia's future, because many overseas investors are looking 
to this country as a place where they can send their capital with

                2
safety and with assurance. It has been suggested that the amount
of overseas capital coming to this country is a dangerous thing
for Australia. In this regard the position certainly wante
watching, but while that capital is employed in establishing new
factories and in hel ping projects like the ollowy Nountain scheme
or, in general terms, adding to our productivity I don't believe
there are reasons for concern. If Australia is living dangerously
in this regard then Canada is living several times more dangerously
because being rightnext door to America she has, for several years,
attracted several times the capital inflow than we have seen in
Australia. Canada has not yet been embarrassed by this capital
inflow, and the positionthere seems entirely satisfactory. If
we learn from her experience there should be little cause for
worry in Australia.
        Fourthly, the Arbitration Court has just given
its judgment on the basic wage. It has authorised a 15/— per
week increase, whit shows the Arbitration Court's confidence
in the future. There is an interesting sidelight which has
come out of this recent judgment. Even though the Court
refused to restore quarterly cost of living adjustments, the Federal
award is now 7/... per week more than the State award in N..W.
where cost of living adjustments were restored by arbitrary
action, the Court claimed thatthe annual review of the basic
wage was more satisfactory and that the annual review gave
employers a sounder basis on which they could regulate their
costs.
        It is worth emphasising that the benefit from
this wage increase, which will add £50 million to theannual
wage bill, can only be maintained if productivity remains at an
increasingly high level. If this increase in the basic wage
does nothing more than add to the price level throughout the
o -,--unity then the benefit to the wage earner will be lost.

                   1~ifferex t affiliated bodies will be applying
to the Court to           ic wa$e increase incorporated in their 
own Award, and am thie is done so will all those under Federal 
Awards be given the benefit of the increase.
                   Finally, before I conclude, I want to say 
that I have been travelling fairly extensively about Wannon, 
advertising where i will be so that electors who have personal
problems which come into vine could approach me about them; 
before parliament resumes in august .I hope to have covered pretty 
well the whole electorate.

