<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget - means test on social security
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 3/09/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                            / -)




     CORRECTION

     In last week's Broadcast it was stated that $268 million 
     had been allocated under the Petroleum Product Prices Scheme.

     This figure should have been $26.8 million.




~

                 3HA - Sunday, 3 September 
                 3YB - Thursday, 7 September 
BROADCAST        3LK - Wednesday, 6 September


    In my recent talks, I have discussed aspects of the 
new Federal Budget, and in one of them, I touched on its 
social services proposals.

    In fact, these proposals constitute the most dramatic 
and extensive changes in our social welfare system for a 
quarter of a century.

    The Liberal/Country Party Government has made a firm 
commitment to the abolition of the Means Test on social service 
payments. Specifically it has pledged "to abolish the means 
test within the next three years for age pension eligibility for 
residentially qualified men and women aged 65 years and over." 
The steps that we have taken now are firm.) The end of the 
means test is just around the corner.

    In this Budget the basic rates of pension have been 
increased to $20.00 per week for a single person and $34.50 
for married couples - that is, rises of $1.75 and $2.50 
respectively and major easing of the Means Test now provides 
that a single person may have a means of $20.00 per week, or 
$34.50 in the case of a married couple and still retain their 
rights to a full pension. In fact, part pensions will be 
payable until means reaches $60.00 a week for single pensioners 
and $103.50 in the case of a married couple. This comes about 
because the "free area" has been doubled, and is now the same 
as the basic pension rate.

    Two other major changes will affect the operation of 
the Means Test. In the first place the value of the deduction 
for each child of a pensioner is to be raised by 50 per cent 
from $4.00 to $6.00. This, of course, will be of great benefit 
to all pensioners especially widow and invalid pensioners with 
dependent children.


                      .../2

                 - 2 -


       A second major change is that superannuation payments 
will no longer be treated as full income under the means test 
but will be treated as if converted to a property value. In 
other words, the value of a person's superannuation will not 
count so heavily against them in assessing their pension 
entitlement. This provision will, of course, be of greatest 
benefit to the older recipients of superannuation and annuities. 
These older recipients are exactly the ones who have lost most 
;through inflation, and the measures proposed will offset this 
to some extent.
          f   '
      (A new deal for pensioners' wives is to come into 
operation.) We now propose'to pay a pension, at the married rate, 
to the wife of an aged, invalid or service pensioner, not now 
qualified herself for a pension. Thus in cases where the wife 
now attracts a wife's allowance the total additional payment 
will be $8.25, and where no allowance is presently made, a 
total increase of $16.25 will occur.

       Some years ago we realised the need to make special 
payment to pensioners paying rent. This boudget doubles the 
rate of this supplementary assistance to $4.00 a week, and 
extends it to married couples.

       Social welfare of course is more than just pensions; 
it is above all a matter of realising where need exists and 
acting in a compassionate way to relieve it. For instance in 
this Budget there are special plans to assist young families, 
the infirm and home purchasers, and I mentioned these briefly 
in one of my recent talks.

       Nursing benefits for the aged will be increased by an 
insurance supplement; all such pensioners will receive this 
extra payment. In addition, a new payment of $14 per week will 
be given, subject to medical certification, to those caring 
for sick aged persons in their own homes.



                                       .../3

                _3


         The subsidy for the care of persons over the age of 
    80 in hostels is to be doubled to $10.00 a week. Again, in 
    this field compassion is the key note.

         When we add the value of actual pension increases, plus 
    the enormous liberalisation of the Means Test; plus an increase 
    in supplementary assistance and deductions for dependent children, 
    it can be seen that this Budget makes the most extensive and far 
    reaching improvements in Australia's social welfare system in 
    the last quarter of a century. To this, of course, must be
    added the significant reductions made in the level of personal 
    income taxation, averaging some 10 per cent.
•        More than 670,000 people will benefit directly from the 
    $1.75 increase in standard rate pensions, and a further 395,000 
    from the $1.25 increase in married rate pensions. In addition 
    the liberalisation of the Means Test will make over 50,000
    people eligible for some part of the pension for the first time.

         It will take some time for all these changes to be put 
    into effect but delays will be absolutely minimal. In previous 
    years we have usually been able to commence payments of new 
    pensions about the beginning of October, and I hope that we will 
    meet that date this year.
•        I must divert here for a moment to mention the 
    improvements in repatriation benefits in the Budget.

         The increases, will total $40 million in a full year 
    bringing the annual repatriation expenditure to more than $400 
    million. This indicates the Government's continued acceptance 
    of the nation's responsibility to the ex-servicemen and women 
    of Australia, their widows and dependents.
         To give one or two examples, the general rate will 
    rise from $12 to $14 a week. The special T & P I rate goes 
    up $3.50 to $48 and the intermediate rate up $2.75 to $34.


                             .../4

                -4


        Substantial easing of the Means Test provisions will 
    ensure that many ex-servicemen and their dependents will receive 
    considerably more than the basic increases. It will also 
    increase the number of those eligible for service pensions.

        In recent years we have made major assaults upon the 
    few remaining pockets of poverty in Australia - those that are 
    left, which will be investigated in our announced Poverty 
    Enquiry, have been reduced by this Budget and will be further 
    reduced by our plans for Means Test abolition. The aleviation 
    of poverty, want, need and personal hardship stands high
    among our national priorities in social welfare.
i
        We still have some way to go on this road, but this 
    Budget and the commitments it contains, represent the largest 
    single step we have ever taken.

