<!--start metadata-->
Title: Self-government for New Guinea
Description: press statement
Date: 9/06/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  PRESS STATEment                        :

                  Malcom Fraser
                                                                                                                                             June 9th,1963


                                                               


Self Governance for New Guinea 
                                    GIJI I]=2,11

                                               In the last days of the autumn session the Minister for 
                  Territories, Paul Hassluck , introduced a Bill in the Commonwealth 
                  Parliament which rrouLl take Australian New Guinea a very long step
                  on the road to full self-government.                    It is the Australian 
                  Government's intention that Australian New Guinea should be brought 
                  to the stage in which New Guinea can be left as an independent,
                  self-governing and economically sound State.              To this end the 
                  Australian tax-payer annually provides between £20 million and £30 
                  million with no thought of any return except the satisfaction of 
                  trying to do a good job for New Guinea.





                                                                                                      ,sbL,Je
















•

       ~ ç ç ,,~rrj... r:
       ~._..,,5 ~`î_,1, i"~_.1~1:







       _iALCOL=.







                                                        June 9th,196





                  When the history of this century comes to be written I 



       would not be at all surprised if it became known as the century in 



       which equality of status was finally accorded to all people, no


       matter what their colour, race or religion. 
                                                 We sometimes forget 


       the almost complete transformation that has taken place since the


       war.   Colony after colony of the United Kingdom has become 




       independent and self-governing, retraining a member of the British

       Commonwealth. 
                      It might give us pause to think, as a member of one 



       of the original dominions in the Commonwealth, that 90% of the mem-


       bers are black.  The farmer British Empire has been transplanted 



       into a group of independent and self-governing dominions with a real 



       degree of friendship and without the bitterness .which has so often 


      been associated with the emancipation of coloured people.







                  In general terms Australia has not been involved in any 


      of these processes, but despite the fact that this country has never 



      had territorial ambitions, has never sought to expand its own rule 


      and its own boundaries, we run the risk: of being one of the last


      colonial porters in the world. 
                                    This is because we have obligations


      and responsibilities in East New Guinea. 
                                               It was only after the war 


      that the Australian Government began to do anything very much to
•
      develop this territory.  From the very outset that development was 



      never undertaken with the attitude that this will be a good financial


      investment for Australia. 
                                 Development was undertaken solely to 


      assist the people of New Guinea and to try and bring Nast New Guinea



      to the stage at which it could be a self-governing and financially 



      sound State.








                 Tremendous improvements have been made in recent years. 


      The Australian approach to this particular problem has been different


      from that adopted by some European countries. 
                                                   For example, France 

      educated an elite of indigenous native in each of the French-African


      colonies.  Then, the running of these French-African States was



      handed over to this native elite. 
      This was not democracy. 
                                                                It was
      not intended to be.  it was more intended to hand the colonies over 



      to a group of people who were able to administer their states



      effectively.  It cannot be denied that France has had a remarkable 



      degree of success  with this policy and the former French-African 



      colonies have a greater loyalty to France than have other former


•     colonies to any other country. 
                                     Nevertheless, the Australian approach


      has been quite different. We have taken the much more difficult step



      of trying to create democracy in New Guinea. 
                                                 When we consider that 

      democracy as we know it is something that has developed over a course



      of one thousand years, we realise the size of our task. 
                              ie are 

      trying to introduce it in about 25 years in New Guinea in an area 



     where the people have no common language, no common custom or religion 



      and Where education was unknown before Australia developed schools.







                Australia began this process of trying to teach democracy


     at the base local government level. 
                                         New Guineans were elected to 


     local government councils and so many people gained a knowledge of



     responsibility and some meaning of the word democracy. 
                                                          In 1960, 

     comprehensive changes were made to the Legislative Council of New Guinea 



     and, under the Act, elections were held early in 1961 for a Council in 


     which the number of elected members was increased from three to twelve 



     and in which the indigenous members were increased from a minimum of


     three to a minimum of eleven. 
                                    When this Council was opened in 1961,


     it was announced that this was just one more stage on the road to full 


     self-government.








               In this last autumn session, the Minister for Territories, 



     Paul Hasluck, announced the further stage which is taking the territory



     of New Guinea a very long way indeed along the road to full self- 


     government.




                                                                /2.

                                     -  2

                  The name of the Legislative Council is going to be changed
       to House of Assembly.   It is thought this name carries with it a 
       greater degree of responsibility than Legislative Council which is a 
       name that, in the minds of many people, has a close relationship to
       colonial regimes.   The membership of this new House of Assembly is
       going to be increased from 37 to 64.  The number of elected members
       of the House will be increased from 12 to 54.  Of this total of 54 
       elected members,members will be elected from a common roll in
       single member constituencies.  Ten members will be elected from a 
       common roll in single member constituencies described as reserved
       electorates.   Both black and white members of New Guinea will be on 
       the common roll and it is thought that the 44 open electorates will
       be represented entirely by indigenous people.  The ten open 
       electorates can only be represented by non-indigenous candidates
       but all people, black and white, will vote for them. This, in fact,
       means that 10 electorates will be reserved for white people. It 
       should be emphasised that the indigenous people of New Guinea wanted 
       some way in which white representation in the House of Assembly 
       could be guaranteed because of their experience which the indigenous
       people of New Guinea recognise they can still need. Voting for 
       this new House of Assembly will be by secret ballot as we know it and 
       each member will be representing about 30,000 voters.


i                 The Administrator's Council, which carries out the job 
       of government, as our Cabinet does in Australia, is also going to be
       expanded from 7 to 11 members.  There will be 6 official members 
       of this Council who will, in fact, be public servants, and 7 non- 
       official members who must be elected by the new House of Assembly.


                  The procedures of the new House of Assembly have been 
       evolved especially- to give its members experience in responsibility 
       and in executive government.


                  It should be emphasised that this Bill was introduced into 
       the Australian Parliament as a result of a report made by a Select
       Committee of the old New Guinea Council.  This Select Committee 
       carried out an exhaustive investigation of the wishes of the people 
       and these comprehensive changes are the result.


                  Last year, a United Nations Committee on Colonial 
       Territories visited New Guinea and made a report suggesting certain
       changes.   This report was a general one. The United Nations 
w      Committee did not ascertain the wishes of the local inhabitants to
       any great degree.  The main purpose of the United Nations Committee 
       is to prod colonial governments into granting self-government as soon
       as possible.   It should be pointed out that while the Government of 
       Australia respects the views and the wishes of this United Nations 
       Committee, it feels that it is acting more in the interests of the 
       people of New Guinea by bringing about reforms that have been asked
       for by the New Guineans themselves.  This is much better than some 
       outside authority coming along and saying - "This is what you want; 
       this is what you require.'




                                       00 0

