<!--start metadata-->
Title: 35-hour week, Labor Party
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 18/07/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                      3HA Sunday 23 July 1972 
    BROADCAST         3YB Thursday 27 July 1972 
                      3LK Tuesday 18 July 1972

       One of the issues causing the Commonwealth Government 

    great concern at the moment is the campaign for the 35-hour 

    working week, and I have indicated on previous occasions the 

    Government's opposition to this development.

       Perhaps the most disturbing feature of it is the 
    insidious way in which the campaign is being foisted upon 

    people.
~      The Government's position is quite clear. Australia's 

    economy simply cannot afford a 35-hour week now. It would 

    cost the nation something like $3000 million in increased 

    costs, according to the Federal Treasurer, and it would 

    reduce wool growers' and dairy farmers' net incomes by 

    more than a third.

       Apart from the cold statistics, does anyone really 

    believe that he can continue to improve his own standard of 

    living, his family's well being and at the same time contribute 

•   to the general advancement of the Australian community by 
    working 35 hours a week?

       This month, we witnessed the double headed policy of 
    the Labor Party on the 35-hour week. Fearing the effect of 

    its introduction on the delicately balanced rural economy, 

    the Labor Party in country areas has been at pains to

    stress that the whole matter would be one for the Arbitration 

    Commission to determine.

       This is a cruel deception, as Labor's spokesman on 

    industrial relations Mr. Clyde Cameron, confirmed a few days 

    ago. He said that a Federal Labor Government would introduce 

    a 35-hour week throughout the Commonwealth Public Service. 
    For once, Mr. Cameron is accurately stating Labor Party policy.

                .2.
    The whole point is - Mr. Cameron and his party know this
    well - that once the Commonwealth established a 35-hour week
    throughout its public service, its introduction throughout
    Australian industry and commerce would be inevitable,
    and no arbitration authority could stop it.
       There is a precedent for this. Some years ago, a
    Labor Government in N.S.W. decided to introduce a 40 hour
    week in that State's public service, with the consequence
    that it was quickly adopted by the Commonwealth Arbitration
•   Commission and others.
       At this stage Australia cannot bear the burden of
    a 35-hour week, and introducing it in the Commonwealth
    Public Service is as good as making it generally applicable.
       The Government's position is clear, and so, I
    believe is the community's general attitude. Regretably, Labor
    is blurring its policy - one story for the country, another
    to satisfy those union leaders, who, in effect, framed that
    policy. The tragedy for Australia's economic development if
    Labor ever achieved office is that the story for the union
•   leaders is the correct one.
       I now refer to one of the most incredible events I
    can recall in the industrial history of our country.
       In South Australia recently a farmer from Kangaroo
    Island sought an injunction against a union and its state
    secretary for placing a ban on the farmer's wool clip. I 
    understand that the ban lasted at least six months. The 
    farmer had also sought the payment of costs and the Supreme 
    Court has awarded them against the union leader,
       The South Australian State Government then took the 
    amazing step of paying the $7,000 court costs awarded 
    against the union official. The Premier I am told has also
    announced that the South Australian Governmen Iegislate to

                 .3.
    make union officials immune from civil actions, and this could 
    well mean that in the kind of case that did occur at Kangaroo 
    Island, farmers would have no redress in law. It would be 
    tantamount to placing the union officials above the law. This 
    is also part of the ALP federal platform.


        In the last year or two, we in Australia have witnessed 
    a distressing tendency to challenge the Rule of law upon which 
    our democratic society is based. At the federal level we 
•   have seen the Leader of the Opposition take his party's objections 
    to the National Service Laws to the extent of advocating courses 
    that could lead to mutiny among the armed forces, and declaring 
    that draft dodging is not a crime.


        We would also remember the occasion on which the 
    South Australian Premier allowed a draft dodger out of prison 
    to speak at a broadcast rally.


        At the same time, we have seen the ALP in our own 
•   state endorse as a candidate for the federal election a 

    man wanted by the police for not conforming to the National 
    Service Regulations. Now, a Labor Government has taken 
    it a step further in South Australia. Their action in paying 
    $7,000 court costs out of tax payers money makes an unhappy 
    mockery of a decision of the Supreme Court which any 
    responsible government would surely respect. The South 
    Australian Government accepts one Rule for the general public 
    and another for its union associates.


        The whole episode is a disconcerting extension of 
    Labor's disregard for normal lawful authority. Whereas, it
    has previously manifested in attempts by the Federal

  4            .4.

     Opposition to have laws changed by deliberately breaking 
     them, in South Australia it has shown itself through the 
     irresponsible misuse of control of the public purse.




•








•

