<!--start metadata-->
Title: Restrictive practices
Description: press statement
Date: 12/12/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                                                                                                 14.



PRESS STATEMENT :

I AT,COLLI FRASER :

                                                                                                                December 12th,1965


                             In the last days of the Parliament the Government's Restrictive 
Practices legislation was introduced and passed.

                             Although many other countries have had Restrictive Practices 
legislation for a long time it has not been possible merely to adopt the 
approach of some other country and say this is good enough for us. Our
circumstances are different to many of the older countries.                                                                     We are a 
young, vigorous and growing country and we have a Constitution that sets 
strict limits on what the Commonwealth can and can not do, and so while 
the approach of many other countries has been closely studied the Common- 
wealth has had to work out and adopt procedures which are suited to
Australia.                   It has taken some time to do this but I believe the result 
will be a worthwhile approach to our problems.

                             A great many people have had experience of restrictive 
practices in one form or another. In Western Victoria we all remember 
the boycott of the Australian Council of Wool Buyers on the Portland wool
sales.                 Such a boycott would not be possible under the Commonwealth 
legislation.

                             While it is important that restrictive practices that are 
harmful to the general public be put without the law it is also important 
to safeguard the legitimate rights of business people, especially of small 
businesses.

                             One of the difficulties in planning legislation of this kind 
is that very few practices are evil in all circumstances. For example, 
there is a fairly common practice of re-sale price maintenance. If
several manufacturers get together under our legislation and impose a joint 
re-sale price maintenance policy on all their distributors, this would be 
an examinable practice and it may well be that it is wrong because it 
lessens competition and could lead to higher prices for the consumers. On 
the other hand, the existence of this practice may make it possible for
small shops to survive.                                If there is no re-sale price maintenance the 
large chain store with its great buying power may be able to force the 
manufacturer to sell to it at concessional rates and it may then be able
to under-cut the small shops.                                       If this tendency happened everywhere small 
shops would be thrown out of business and most of us would say that this is
not a good thing.                         So here we have in fact a conflict between two interests, 
on the one hand getting goods into the consumers hands as cheaply as possible 
and on the other maintaining the rights of small businesses.

                             The legislation provides that all these matters will be taken 
into consideration.

                             There are two different approaches that can be adopted in dealing
with this subject.                           On one one hand there is the American approach.                                                        The 
Americans have said that certain practices are unlawful and it is an offence 
to take part in any such practices or agreements, there can be no excuse for
them.             This is a blunt weapon.                                It certainly catches guilty people but
it catches some innocent ones as well.                                               It is a rough justice. We have 
felt that this would be too much of a sledge-hammer for our circumstances 
and therefore our legislation is more nearly based upon the British approach 
in which certain agreements and Practices are to be examinable by a judicial
tribunal to say whether or not they are in'the public interest.                                                                         For this 
purpose we have established a Commissioner who will keep a register of certain
trade agreements.                         There will not, at this stage, be a register of practices, 
but even though practices at this stage are not registerable they are still
examinable by the Tribunal.                                    The Commissioner will have to examine each case 
to see if he believes it to be cont-^ary to public interest. If he comes to

                                                                                                                                                  /2

f

                                        -   2 -

        this conclusion it is then up to the Commissioner to prove to the judicial 
        Tribunal that there has been a reduction in competition as a result of the
        agreement or of the practice.     Once he has proved this it will then be 
        open to the opposing parties to show that despite the reduction in 
        competition there is a valid public interest in having the practice or
        agreement maintained.    The sort of things that must be taken into account 
        by the Tribunal are the interests and needs of a great many sections of 
        the community, of consumers, employees, producers, distributors, importers, 
        exporters, proprietors and investors; the needs and interests of small 
        businesses; the promotion of new enterprises and the ability of Australian
        producers to compete in overseas markets.   These are just a few of the 
        things that must be taken into consideration when the Tribunal is taking 
        its final determination.

                      Great responsibility will rest upon the Tribunal and there is
        no way to avoid this.    The only way to make the Tribunalts task easier 
        and more clear cut would have been to set down in detailed legislative form 
        the practices or agreements that were to be proscribed. I have already 
        pointed out that the difficulty of this approach is that circumstances often 
        differ and that agreements can have a different impact on different
        industries.    In some they may be in the public interest while in others 
        they could be against the public interest.

                      The Government has felt it safer to have a final judgment 
        made by a judicial Tribunal rather than bar detailed legislation, and so 
        the Act sets down those matters which the Tribunalshould take into 
        consideration.

                      Collusive tendering and collusive bidding will be without 
        the law under nearly all circumstances and there will be no defence for 
        carrying out these practices unless they are carried out in accordance 
        with an agreement that is registered and examinable. Let me put it 
        this way. Petrol Companies have often tendered at exactly the same price
        for their oil and fuel products.    If the petrol companies get together 
        for the purpose of a specific tender and then all tender the same price this 
        would be without the law and without the possibility of defence in the
        public interest.   However, if the petrol companies have a long standing 
        agreement which was registered by the Tribunal and if they have set down the 
        terms and conditions on which the petrol companies would make joint tenders, 
        then if that agreement had not been de-registered by the Tribunal as
        contrary to the public interest the companies could then make joint tenders- 
        in accordance with the agreement.

                      The legislation that has been passed is pioneering for 
        Australia, and as such we will have to watch its operation and progress to 
        make sure the legislation bites sufficiently into practices that need 
        control.

                      On the other hand we must also watch that legitimate agree- 
        ments that are in the public interest are not jeopardised by the
        legislation.     The Government must hold itself ready, I believe, to 
        introduce any amendments to this legislation that may be proved necessary
        as a result of the experience of the legislation.  I think there are very 
        few people who would not be glad that we have taken this step and, as a 
        result, in this report I have not tried to argue the justification for the 
        legislation but to give some understanding of how it may be expected to
        operate and of the principles that lie behind it.   I believe the 
        justification and need for it is accepted by the great majority. Basically, 
        the legislation is designed to remove restrictions that are imposed by private
        interests or groups of people, to the detriment of other individuals. It
        does not create restrictions, it will remove them.  It is designed to 
        prevent undue economic power, held singly or in association, being used 
        unfairly in a narrow sectional interest as opposed to being used reasonably 
        in the general interest.



                                          o0o

