<!--start metadata-->
Title: Where to look for future leaders - Australia and the United States compared
Description: United States visit 1964 - press statement
Date: 1/06/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   PRESS STATEMENT:

   IALCOLM FRASER:
                            Washington, 
                            June lst,l964



   WHERE TO LOOK FOR FUTURE LEADERS - ALSTRALIA & UNITED STATES COMPARED :


          The last few days have been particularly busy ones. The 
   State Department, that's what the American's call their Department of 
   External Affairs, has arranged a great number of appointments for me with 
   people in their own State Department, in their Department of Agriculture 
   and at the Pentagon - which is what they call their Department of Defence. 
   There is no special reason for that, but the building was built in the 
   shape of a Pentagon, so when anyone refers to the Defence Department they 
   now just say the Pentagon.

          Some of these interviews are repetitive because in many 
   instances I find that I am talking about the same problems to many different 
   people who perhaps deal with a slightly different aspect of it. This is 
   useful, especially when important issues like South Vietnam or Indonesia
•  are raised, because it means that the matter is examined from every possible 
   point of view.

          There is one thing which is immediately striking to an 
   Australian in the American system, and this is because our parliamentary 
   system is so different and perhaps we don't realize the extent of the 
   difference from afar. In Australia we look for future leaders from the 
   Parliament. These will be the future Ministers and the future Prime 
   Ministers of our country. If they are not in the Parliament now they will 
   join the Parliament at some future time becau.se this is the training ground 
   and the breeding ground of the future leaders. This is because of our 
   Parliamentary system in which Ministers and the Prime Minister must be of 
   the Parliament. In the United States it is quite different and although 
   we know and understand the difference we don't realize the significance 
   that this has and the effect it has upon the American House of Representatives 
   and the American Senate. It is very rare for future American leaders to go 
   up through the ranks of their House of Representatives. It is not quite 
   so rare but 3.t is still rare for American leaders to come through the 
   Senate - that is, of course, the American Senate. This means that the
.  American Congress attracts to some extent a different sort of person. I 
   guess this is perhaps a difference of degree rather than a difference in 
   kind. If you are looking for future leaders in the United States, if 
   you are looking for a future Secretary of State - who in our terms would 
   be the Minister for External Affairs, you don't look or it would be unusual 
   to look in Congress itself. You may look amongst other people of the 
   Administration who have been appointed by the appropriate President; you 
   may look amongst people who have worked energetically and enthusiastically 
   for the Party - the political party that is in power you may look in the 
   Universities. President Kennedy was notable and outstanding in that he 
   appointed people of high university and academic distinction to many 
   important administrative posts. It would be unusual to look to Congress. 
   This means that an American who has the highest ambition to serve his 
   people and to serve his country may well think twice about going into 
   Congress, because while there are no actual limitations that membership of 
   Congress may place upon his future career it is not necessarily the best 
   place to further his career, to get into a position of greatest influence 
   so that he could be of greatest service to his country.

          This is an immediate and striking difference in the American 
   and the Australian or British systems, because in our country there would 
   be no second thoughts. A person with these ambitions, with these hopes 
   for the future of his country would obviously enter our Federal Parliament


                                  /2

                 _ 2


   because the opportunities to serve are greatest in this particular forum.

         It is again because of the nature of the American systems that 
   it is perhaps more difficult to pick future potential leaders. Before 
   President Kennedy seriously entered in their primary contests to get the 
   Democratic nomination there were few and perhaps no expert observers in 
   the American scene who really believed that President Kennedy would become 
   President. He was a member of the Senate with a record that, in many 
   ways, was not outstandingly different from a record of other notable 
   Senators. He is, in many respects, the exception that proves my point 
   because he was a Senator who went on to the highest office in the land. 
   This is a most unusual thing to happen.



                  oOo
•


















•

