<!--start metadata-->
Title: Japanese/Australian relations
Description: radio talks
Date: 16/10/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT             / 7 gal- - ‘7,
Malcolm Fraser          16 October 1967

         JAPANESE/AUSTRALIAN RELATIONS
         Statement by Malcolm Fraser, 
         Federal Member for Wannon.

     On the occasion of the visit to Australia of the Japanese Prime 
Minister, Malcolm Fraser, recently reviewed the course of Australia's 
relationship with Japan over the years since the last World War.
     Before that time Japanese goods coming into Australia were 
under—cutting the prices of infant Australian industries and business relations 
generally between our two countries were bad. Then came the World War and 
we know what that meant to Australia and to many thousands of her people.
     The Japanese Trade Treaty was negotiated in 1956, more than 10 
years after the end of the war but only 5 years after the signing of the 
Japanese Peace Treaty. At the time, many people were taken by surprise by 
this move that was boldly pioneered by the Minister for Trade, John McEwen. 
In reply to objections raised during the debate on this Treaty, the Government 
pointed out that there were safeguards built into it to protect our own 
industries. But in fact, the greatest safeguard of all has been the spirit 
of co—operation which has developed between the two countries and between the 
business communities of Japan and Australia.
     In Mr. McEwen's speech of welcome to Mr. Sato he pointed out that 
both the Japanese and Australians were realists and that trade between the 
two countries has expanded on the basis of mutual benefit, understanding, 
responsibility and trust, coupled with a recognition of each other's problems. 
We understand Japan's need to protect her farm industries from destruction by 
other countries, and Japan understands our need to protect manufacturing 
industries in this country. Mr. McEwen pointed out that over the last ten 
years trade between Japan and Australia has greatly expanded to our mutual 
advantage without harming industries in the other country.
     In the 10 years since the Treaty was signed, Japan's exports to 
Australia have grown eight times and Australia is now Japan's seventh most 
important market. We are in fact her second biggest customer for cotton 
textiles and motor vehicles. On the other hand, Japan is now Australia's 
largest single export market. Ten years ago we exported $278 million worth 
of goods to Japan. Last year we exported $588 million dollars worth, or 19% 
of our total exports. In total figures, imports from Japan have risen from 
$26 million in 1956 to $297 million in 1966, which represents 10% of our total 
imports. Japan is our largest single customer for wool, coal, iron ore, barley, 
dried and condensed milk and cheese. She is our second largest customer 
for butter, sugar and for mutton and lamb. She is our third largest
customer for beef and veal, wheat and iron and steel. One has only to look 
at the great increase in exports to Japan from our rural industries to 
understand what the Japanese Trade Treaty has meant to Australia and to 
primary producers in particular.

             2 -

     The standard of living and level of productivity in both our 
countries is rising very rapidly. Thus, there is potential for an even 
greater increase in our trade and so we can look forward to an even closer 
relationship with Japan.

     Our trade relations have inevitably extended mutual co-operation 
and understanding in other areas. We have the same basic aim to provide a 
rising standard of life throughout the Asian and Pacific area, and to do 
whatever we can to achieve stability for the whole region. Mr. Fraser 
suggested that it could be expected that Japan would play an increasing 
part in future years in working towards this goal. In the immediate 
post-war years she devoted hereself to the reconstruction of her own country 
and economy, and it is only in recent times that she has begun to use her 
undoubted influence in world affairs. Under present policies and direction, 
it is likely that this influence will be used with increasing emphasis to 
the good of the whole region.

