<!--start metadata-->
Title: building societies, bank funds, increase in money supply, Dr Cains, Leyland, unemployment,
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 13/10/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                  EMBARGO 6,00 p.m.
 ELECTORAL STATEMENT                      Sunday, 13th Oct.
                THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON m MALCOLM FRASER 
                ELECTORAL RAD.I.0 TALK


 Building Societies

 Over this last week a number of startling things have been happening. 
 For a day or two there was a run on building societies and an immense 
 amount of concern over the future of the societies was shown. Luckily, 
 confidence in the building societies was restored and a run spreading 
 through those building societies into the banking system itself was 
 averted.

 That particular incident, however, and the employment figures announced 
 over the weekend gave the government an enormous fright,

 Bank Funds

 As a result there has been a release of funds from the Reserve Bank into 
 the banking system. The government, at the same time, is issuing state- 
 ments saying the credit squeeze is off, allegedly telling the private 
 banks to lend to individuals.

 I doubt if it is going to be much easier for individuals ter get funds 
 as a result of these moves. Many of the trading banks aré themselves 
 in debt to the Reserve Bank as they have been forced to go to the 
 Reserve Bank at punitive rates of interest to cover their present posit- 
 ions

 The release from statutory reserve deposits may do little more than 
 enable the banks to get,to some extent, out of the hands of the Reserve 
 Bank. However, the Reserve Bank has released something over 
 $112,000,000 to the private and to the Commonwealth trading banks.

$6000,000,000 increase in money supply needed 

 I have estimated that traders, business people and farmers all around 
 Australia between them will need96000,000,000 more this year to finance 
 the same level of activities as last year. That figure is worked out 
 in this ways the total money supply is about $25,000,000,000. If a 
 small manufacturer needs $100,000 a year in stock and raw materials 
 those items will have increased in value by 20 or 25% because of in- 
 flation. Therefore, whereas last year he needed $100,000 to cover those 
 items, he will now need $120,000 to do it. The same thing can be said 
 for everyone in business, whether in farming or secondary industry or 
 retailing ® it does not matter.

Thus more funds are needed m 20 m 25% more than last year and that comes

                                                             20

to $E000,000,000 when you take in business right around the country. 
If more funds are not available, the only consequence is for people
to cut down their level of activities. If you are a grocer you will 
have to cut down on the number of lines you have on your shelf and. 
that makes it harder, ofcourse, to provide a good service to the com- 
munity.

So an extra5000,000,000 is going to be required, $112,000,000 against 
that is not really very much.

Uniforms - Cairns - Murray Grey

There was tragi-comedy in relation to Dr Cairns' second visit to China. 
It was cancelled and people thought that this was because of the run 
on the building societies. Then Dr Cairns said it was not cancelled 
for that reason but because the Chinese were not prepared to allow 
R.A.A.F. personnel to wear their uniforms in China. They had apparently 
worn these uniforms in China when they had unloaded the Murray Grey 
bull which was a gift from the Prime Minister to Chairman Mao, but they 
apparently were not allowed to wear them when they were unloading Dr 
Cairns to negotiate with Chairman Mao.

After a day or two of top level diplomatic negotiations a compromise 
was reached - the Australian government gave in. They could wear their 
uniforms in the aircraft but would have to change as soon as they arrived 
in China. I have no doubt that the government believes that that was 
an appropriate compromise.

Leyland

There have been reports this week in the press about the future of 
Leyland. This car manufacturer near Sydney employs 5,000 people. Many 
thousands more would be involved when one takes,into account the many 
suppliers of that company - the component manufacturers and independant 
companies who are largely reliant on Leyland business.

Whether or not Leyland survive will depend on governmental decisions, 
but it is `beginning to look as though the writing is on the wall.. It 
needs only' to be added that many of the things the government has done 
in recent times would have contributed greatly to the difficulty of 
this company.

Unemployed

The government has allegedly spent $1.3 million on two marble statues. 
It has spent approximately $640,000on a painting called "Woman V". 
Can one really believe the sincerity of the Prime Minister when he 
said that this was a period of restraint. Perhaps restraint is over

                               3
because Dr Cairns said that the credit squeeze is over - for a second 
time

I think that he has also said that the economy is sound and on top of 
that we get the news of 130,000 unemployed on the figures admitted by 
Mr Camerone

Those figures have excluded school leavers. If they were included the 
figure is 160,000. I don't know who Mr Cameron thinks he is kidding 
or how long he can get away with the contention that school leavers 
are not people, If they are out of work their personal tragedy is 
just as difficult as anyone else who is unemployed. It could even be 
worse because someone who has just left school and is just starting 
out in life and who can't get a job is in a very difficult position 
indeed.

In June next year there will be over 100,000 school leavers unable to 
get jobs unless things change dramatically. Is Mr Cameron going to 
refuse to count them? When is the government going to be forced to 
give full figures?

In addition to that we need to know when the government is going to 
give us full details of those who are unemployed. We need to know those 
who are employed in the Regional Employment Development (RED) Scheme, 
those who are getting special relief as a result of tariff induced 
hardship and we need to know the numbers being trained under the 
National Employment and Training System (NEAT) because these are all 
people who could well have been unemployed under other circumstances.

Only when we know the total number of those actually unemployed and 
those involved in these three schemes will we know the measure of the 
government's damage to the Australian economy,


                e e e

