<!--start metadata-->
Title: National Development
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 1/06/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                WIC OW PRÂ8iMLIABLii FOE WANUONreports on                                  TiS 
                                                                  14140AA4 PEVIIPMAT• 
                      Every Australian is pledged to support oh active and vigorous
policy of national development. Whet we do in this sphere is a measure 
of our faith and belief in the futur. greatness of his country. The 
average .listralien livine in his own hone or on his awn farm or 
property does not get very muchn opportunity to measure what we are 
actually doing in this field. then I say "ice' I den't necessarily 
mean the Government because a great deal of national development is 
 undertaken by privoe people or by private tntittLonB of one kind or
 another. It is true that Governments can and must do a great dal
  to create tbo right climate in which people will have the confidence tc 
 go ahead and plea for the future. This is a direct result of Govern- 
  ment policies. Althougn Covernments, both Ctate and Federal, play an 
  important major role in nutionul development, their task is different 
  from the task of private people or private institutions. ..pert from 
  creating the right climate for e spirit of development, Governments
  tusks are, Lin the broad, limited to those which privets people or 
  private institutions cannot undertake for themselves.
                           I spoke a few weeks ago about the ZILowy Mountains iroject
  under which the Government carries out the major programge of 
  constructing the eams and the tunnels and the power stations. 
    Then the water is made available for farmers to use for irrigation 
    for the alleviation of drought and the power is available to the
    coneumars of 14 Louth Wales and Victoria.
                             This is a partnership between the Government and the 
    people - a partnership in which both play their own important and 
    vital role in the natenel development of this country.
                             I thought you might like tomaptidr to be given some
    picture of ho e this country has developed over the last 8 or 9 
    yeers. Alen we stay in our own homes or onnour own farms, we 
     sometimes don't realise how much the face of feestrelis is changing 
     with Use times and therefore I want to give a short review of our 
     nationalprogress. In the first place, since 1949, ustrelia's
     population has increased by ntarly 2 million.                                                                             About half of this 
      is due to vAaat iconowists in their jart-,en call natural increase

andabout half has been due to immigration. I believe it is a 
remarkable tribute to this country that we have been able to absorb 
,as many people as this end to absorb by far the greater proportion 
of them auccessfully Into our Ltstralian comraunity, I know quite 
well that the national characteristics askeagtaisamigrants remain for
  generation or two but our experienee in the past and the experience 
of the United .3tates has been that after one or two generations these 
people adopt the spirit of their new country and a love of their new 
country equal to that of older Australians without reservations of 
any kind.
         AO measure of our national development over the last
8 or 9 years, there are now 12,000 more factories in Australia 
producing a great number of goods that we formerly had to import. 
In addition to ti si greater numbei: of factories, many existing 
factories have, of course, increased their capaoity and increased 
their size. Obvious examples of this-would be the expansion policies 
of the motor manufacturers in ,'eAstralia especially of Fords end
General Motors. This, perhaps, gives the lie to the glair by 
some people that production in this country is being concentrated 
in et few large institutions. It is difficult to (mellow this is the 
case with 12,000 new factories.
         When we look. at basic materials, we find that 150 more 
steel is being produced now than in 1949 and electricity generation 
has doubled. There are over 7i million evtnge Bank accounts in 
Australia. Lod these amount to a record total of over 2.1250 million. 
Wage and salaries have increased from 54% to 6(4; of the national 
income, a fact which shows that the share of wages ani salaries as 
opposed to company profit has been increasing over the last 8 or
9 years, despite the fact that in the Parliament I have often heard 
people saying that this is not so.
          In adeition to these things, overseas investors have shown 
confidence in this country end Julie, in the last 8 years, invested 
mam. in Australia. Some people claim that this is bad for 
Australia and that our companies and our factories will be owned

by people in the United :angdom or in the Un.ite tìec. This is a 
short-term viewpoint, because the money offering from abroad makes 
it possible for us to do things that we would not otherwise be able
to do. That money is converted into essentiul imports cdpbachinexy 
so that our factories may operate and give good and stable employment 
to our people or, elternatively, it is converted into factories 
themselves which ereemploying an increasing numbex of Auetralian 
people. If we do not have this overseas capital in this country 
our rate of development will not be so rupid and we will net be able 
to find good and stable employment for so many people.
       The Australian people are obliged to pursue this policy 
of development to build up our population, t build up our manu- 
facturing capacity and, at the same time, to increase the produce from 
the land. This also obviously entails soma preeent sacrifice.
       LUite clearly, a balance has to be kept between national 
development and present consumption but we must remember the one 
vital fact present consumption does not make this country secure in 
the future and national development does. This point makes any 
present sacrifices worth while.

