<!--start metadata-->
Title: Water conservation projects
Description: radio talks
Date: 8/11/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       -

        WATER CONSERVATION PROJECTS.
Statement by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P., Federal Member for Wannon.


    Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Wannon, said this week that 
a significant announcement, concerning large scale irrigation projects 
in Western Australia and Queensland has been made by David Fairbairn, 
Minister for National Development. The most important of these was the 
decision to go ahead with Stage 2 of the Ord River Irrigation Project. 
The Commonwealth share of Stage 2 will be $48 million. This will ultimately 
enable 170,000 acres of land in the rich Kimberley region to be irrigated. 
The first stage was completed in 1962 and enabled about 12,000 acres to be 
irrigated, which has made it possible to establish about 30 farms between 
600-700 acres. In addition, a new town was built at Kunnamurra with a 
population of about 1,000. The first stage of the dam cost $17,000,000 
in total, of which the Commonwealth provided by far the major share. Results 
from these trial areas have been continuously more encouraging. The main 
crop so far has been cotton and the average yield per acre has increased 
over each of the last three years. Prospects for commercial production of 
grain sorghum also appear to be more encouraging than they were a year or 
two ago.

    Also, it is hoped that the irrigation of the Kimberley district 
will provide substantial benefits to the cattle industry. Although the 
Kimberleys is in a good rainfall area, most of the rain falls in a brief 
period of the year and for some months the food value of the normal pastures 
is very poor. If economic supplementary feeding of some kind can be 
developed the cattle industry in the Kimberleys would be revolutionised.

    The Emerald Irrigation Project was submitted to the Commonwealth 
by the Queensland Government, This project would enable a range of crops 
including cotton, sorghum, wheat and lucerne to be grown under irrigation. 
Subject to further checks on certain aspects, the prospects for this project 
are sufficiently encouraging to be included in the programme. Its cost 
should be about $20 million.

    As part of the last election platform, the Commonwealth promised 
to undertake a $50 million programme for the conservation of water in 
different states. Under this programme, submissions were to be made to the 
Commonwealth by the States and the $50 million was to be additional to 
expenditure that would normally be undertaken by the States. The first of 
the two projects which I have mentioned, the Ord River Irrigation Project, 
is to be considered as outside the National Water Resources Development 
Programme and regarded rather as a special northern development project. 
In other words, when the various projects within the orbit of the election 
promise are decided upon, they, together with the Ord Project', will involve 
a total expenditure by the Commonwealth of $98 million.

