<!--start metadata-->
Title: The development of North Queensland
Description: radio talks
Date: 28/11/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                   •=1--
                   -   `'j~:~~







       MINISTER FOR THE ARMY








      Wyi%,e~~d





                       M. P.














NAREEN,              PARLIAMENT HOUSE
VICTORIA             CANBERRA, A.C.T.
TEL. TARRAYOUKYAN 44 TEL. 72867
                       72868

 RADIO SPEECH      3HA — Sunday 26 November 1967
 MALCOLM FRASER    3YB — Thursday 30 November 1967


        THE DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH QUEENSLAND


      I spent a considerable time during this last Senate election 
 campaign in North Queensland. My first port of call in these areas was 
 Mount Isa. The Mount Isa Mining Co. is near the end of a 50% expansion 
 programme costing $130 million which has enormously lifted the production 
 and increased employment in and around. Mount Isa.

      I imagine a good many people from Southern Australia think 
 of Mount Isa as a dry, dusty spot which would be oppressively hot most of 
 the time. This certainly was not so in my own short visit. I think 
 there is more green grass at Mount Isa than there is at Melbourne at this 
moment and the people who live in the town have devoted a good deal of 
 time to making the place an attractive and pleasant one in which to live.

     A few miles out of the town there is an artificial lake which 
not only provides a very good water supply but also an attractive place 
for picnics,waLer ski—ing and swimming.

     The expansion in Mount Isa was, of course, greatly helped by the 
upgrading of the Mount Isa/Townsville railway, without which the increased 
production from the mine could not have been moved to Townsville for export.

     After Mount Isa I visited Cairns and Issiafail. This is in the 
heart of the sugar country and nearly everyone is dependent upon sugar 
in one form or another. The towlB are prosperous and progressive. On the 
flat country between the mountain range and the sea there is mile upon 
mile of sugar cane in different stages of growth. The present crushing 
season has nearly ended and so most of the sugar mills were not operating.

     This industry is facing its own difficulties at the present time. 
In 1963 the average world price per ton of sugar was about £72 stg anc this 
has dropped steadily since that time until in January of this year the 
average world price per ton was only a little above £13 stg. The present 
price is about £22.5 stg, which since devaluation has become £25 stg.

     The world price of sugar has fallen because of a breakdown in 
international sugar arrangements which has largely been brought about by the 
activities of Cuba. Up to a short while ago the Cubans had refused to 
participate in discussions that could work out a new agreement. These 
discussions are now taking place and the industry is watching very closely,

                2.



 hoping that agreement will be reached during the next year. If an 
 agreement is not reached, the outlook for the industry, not only in 
 Australia but in many underdeveloped countries will be gloomy. This is 
 all the more important for this coastal strip in North Queensland because 
 its prosperity is entirely dependent upon sugar.

      Once you get up into the Atherton tableland you find a more 
 mixed agriculture. Tobacco and dairying are the main activities in this 
 area, but there is a significant timber industry there and maize and peanuts 
 are also grown in substantial quantities. In past years there was a good 
 deal of mining done on the tablelands, and tin is still mined there.

      As an interesting sidelight to the rural and agricultural 
 activities of this area, a Cairns firm has recently won a contract to build 
 11 LCM's for the Australian Army. These are light landing craft capable of 
 carrying about 60 tons. Each craft itself weighs about 70 tons. They could 
 for instance, carry one Centurion tank. This firm has only been in the 
 ship—building business for about two or three years, but it won the contract 
 against every old and established ship—building firm in Australia. It is 
doing a very good job indeed and this is a classic example of how a 
decentralised industry can be successful because of the skill and enterprise 
6f its managers.

     On my way south I visited the Army's Tropical Trials Units at 
Tully and Mourilyan, just south of Innisfail. This is a newly established 
unit of the Australian Army but is g very important one because it is 
responsible for testing all our equipment and supplies in tropical areas. 
This is the area in which King Ranch and the Queenslazd Department ofi Primary 
Industries are having enormous success in knocking down rain forest and 
developing pastures on which, on a year—round basis, they can go close to 
fattening a beast to the acre. The rainfall in this area is, of course, 
one of the highest in Australia, with a yearly average fall of 175 ins. 
These remarkable achievements are additional to the splendid advances 
which have been made by the CSIRO Pastoral Research Laboratory at Townsville, 
all of which is opining up a new pastoral and agricultural future fir these 
regions.

     In general I found the roads in this area to be good and certainly 
in the sugar areas nearly all farms were connected to State electricity of 
some kind.

     One of the inspiring things about this northern part of Australia 
is the enthusiasm and general spirit of the people who live in the aea.

                3.


They know the north is developing; they have great faith in its future; 
they are quite certain that Northern Australia's mining, pastoral and 
agricultural potential will be playing an ever-increasing part in the 
development of Australia and that it will become more important to the 
overall development of this country in the next few years. Everything 
I saw certainly confirmed this attitude.




            WOOL MARKETING

     On another subject I would like to mention that I have asked 
the leaders from the three wool-growing organisations in this electorate 
to come to a small meeting in Hamilton to discuss the Wool-Board's
marketing proposals. I know these are under discussion within the
industry itself, and that much discussion will take place on the proposals 
between the Wool Industry Conference, the Wool Board and the various grower 
organisations. However, I thought it would be useful for the three 
organisations, who together represent the woolgrowers of this district, to get 
together at a small meeting where the problems of the industry can be 
discussed, if necessary for a full day. I have suggested that the meeting 
be held on 18 December, and have asked representatives of the Hamilton 
District Committee of the Australian Primary Producers' Union, of the Kowree 
District Council and the South West District Council of the Victorian Wheat 
and Woolgrowers Association, and also an equivalent number of representatives 
from the Graziers' Association. So far, I am glad to say that the APPU and 
the Kowree District Council have already indicated that they will be happy 
to take part in the meeting. I hope the meeting will be useful for the 
industry representatives. It will certainly be most useful for me and will 
be a great help in any future discussions which might occur in Canberra.

