<!--start metadata-->
Title: Development Bank
Description: radio talk
Date: 15/11/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


5—MINUTE TALK BY MALCOLM FRASER , MEMBER FOR WANNON — 15/11/57.
    Tonight I want to speak on another aspect of the Government's 
Banking legislation which vitally concerns primary producers. The 
Government's Development Bank represents a radical change in policy 
so far as primary producers are concerned. It combines two other 
institutions, the Industrial Finance Department and the Mortgage 
Bank Department of the old Commonwealth Bank.
    Under the old legislation, the Industrial Finance Department
was instituted to make loans to industrial undertakings. If, in the 
Bank's opinion, the project was going to be successful and profitable 
in the future, than the Industrial Finance Department was empowered 
to make a loan even if the security at the time of making the loan 
was very small. The Industrial Finance Department judged an 
applicant's character and the possible success of his enterprise 
and if its opinion was favourable, it granted the loan.
    The Mortgage Bank had often been quoted in the Parliament
as a counterpart to this for primary producers. This, however, was 
very far from the truth, The Mortgage Bank was originally set up 
in war—time by Mr. Chiflcy but never operated for primary producers 
in the way that the Industrial Finance Department operated for small 
industries. The chief reason was that the security requirements 
of the Mortgage Bank were too severe. They were very nearly as 
severe as the requirements of any normal Trading Bank. Therefore, 
if a farmer was able to obtain a loan from a Mortgage Bank he could 
probably get that same loan from his Trading Bank. Under thbse 
conditions, the Mortgage Bank served no useful purpose and no real 
function. Its advances never rose above P4 or £5M. whereas tho 
advances of the Industrial Finance Department were three or four 
times that figure.
    In this new legislation, the Government has recognised the
limitations of the old Mortgage Bank and under the new Development 
Bank, the security requirements hove been relaxed to bring them 
into line with the requirements of the old Industrial Finance 
Department.
                         /It

              -2—
    It has been said by some Labour spokesmen that the Development 
Bank is a sop to country interests and the Country party in particular. 
Nothing is further from the truth. Tho Development Bank makes avail- 
able to primary produccrs and to small farmers in particular, 
facilities that hove, for n long time, boon available to small 
industrial ontorprises. Surely this is just. Broadly spooking, it 
can be said that a man's own character and the value of the land 
after it is developed will be token as security.
   I believe that this change in regard to rural finance is 
not only just but absolutely necessary and if any justification wore 
noaded for this claim, it is e fact that Australia's future develop- 
ment now as in the past, dope/ads upon the quality, the quantity and 
the value of the primary produce that we send abroad to the markets 
of the world. It is primary products that pay for 80 to 90% of our 
imports at the present time.
   Several months ago I sont out o statement in which I said 
that past policies have not helped all groups of primary producers. 
I pointed out that special depreciation allowances only helped those 
primary producers whose incoras arc largo enough to enable, them to 
improve their properties out of income. I also said that I believed 
that thora are many settlers throughout Australia whose incomes 
have not risen to this level and who were hold back chiefly for lack 
of developmental capital. I believe those arc many such instances 
of people throughout this electorate itself -- round Haywood and 
Drumbourg and there arc the now settlers at Dorodong -- many of the 
people to whom I refer hava, perhaps, only a portion of their prnpar- 
tics cleared and developed. It may be 150 out of 600 acres. It is 
not possible on this 150 acres to make enough money to look after the 
family's living standards and, at the same time, to put much money 
back into further development especially since, at this time,
development costs have become quite high. Many of these people have 
not bean able to improve their properties out of income and they 
have not been able to borrow from existing banking sources because 
their security in the present has not always been good enough.
                        /it

               3—
   It is my hope that the now Development Bank will fulfill the 
need that has boon so badly wanted and that th osc people of courage 
and good character who wish to expand their production not only for 
their own benefit but for the benefit of Australia will be ablc to 
obtain finance from this new Development Bank after it opens its doors.
   At the beginning of this talk I said that tho Development 
Bank represented a radical change in policy so far as primary
producers wero concorncd. This is true, and if the Governors of 
the Bank operate as wo hope, it will be of untold advantage to 
Australia as a whole.

