<!--start metadata-->
Title: Education for prosperity
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: c1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                              TOR !eRGSPERS=.:



         •  i,..ustreli e one of the: freest rnd :richest countries in the


eorld. 'ihen we stop and think of trio things we have done here in our one 


hundred and eighty yeers' 7es:eessiont we may be quietly proud of our 


achievement. :17ost the first country to win full 2oliticel rights for 

every citizen, we _low have a prosperous, energetic, society - just 


awakening to the unlimited poseibilities of cur AU-Strain,.


            It is our job to see that these podsibilities are grasped and


eyrioitedi

            The ver4 foundation ci our politicel freedom lies in our ability 


to crebeint and dismiss Governments. You will remember, when trie Labour 


?arty cou8ht to nationalise the banks c few eers ago, how th great mass 


of popular opinion rose ag-inst that Tarty in defence of traditional 


right: that is, the right to do what we like with our money. In r few 


weeks' time the people will have to give their verdict on the Liberal 


Government of t ,e lest three y9,ars., This Goyern,uenu 'asivenus,ful4
                                  Xetei,t--     it-64-       C . (
emplo;:,ment thereQ4          one man receiving bone ts idithe very large


a_ea covered by the Communwer th Employment Service at Hamilton, and the 
                            (fA
position in -.r.i.-nembool is very much the samei, it has given us lower           eA,
tdimes - reductions have been         on incoTies of ,=,6^-,) year for a man withe',


;two children, and:W for a man earning L,OU. e year, with a wife and 


two children; and it has given us increased social services, which 


include reccbrdipnng1un rises c7/0 over four years), and for the :first 


time in our history, a comprehaneive healt11 scheme.


            If the people approve these HillfS, then the .,,ibervl Government 


must be returned, especially so since this achievement has been made ti the 

face of extraordinary difficulties : Comatnists had to be ousted from the 


%aims (end this was only made possible ey secret ballot legislationi, 


inflation hpa to be curbed, and the .orean bicr won. In all these things, 


the Government stood firm in its po1icies, thus making our present


position of full employment and prosperity possible.


            ihe right to C.TCEE approval or disapproval of Coveraments 


carries ,ith it an oeligation. The obligation is to judge the issues 


calmly on the true merit of echievemel_ts. The issues are riot always so 


         defined as they are for this comiztg electian and it ic our


 ,,ob to see that our children can play their Itrue part in the management

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •
            of Our .Australial when their time comes to vote.
                                                                Over these- last tan yearS our schools have .been.overerewded• The • •
            re seri fer.this.•i s hat• the birthrate fell..in•the unhappyd:press-4..on.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •
            of the thirties, and cansoluently                                                                                                                                                                             heel bnildinh Stoped at that time.
            During the war nothing could be Lane, but from the greatly increased
            birthrate in the immediate post-war years it was seen that the schools 
            then existin,z would soon become inadef_juate. Today, we nave caught up
            with much of this need -for                                                                                                                                more schools* In many areas new cansoliated
•.• Schoolt• have been built. These serve. larger .diStrictsj ana they 7.ave 
            taken the glace of many "n-)e -'-n" schools. 
                                                                Theroblem, however, was not only to get• children tp school,
     •      but the most iliportnt•task was to teach them to become good citizens* 
            For thisparpoSe the ola co-..nce:pt of the nthree Risn •is•not enough. . . 
            Today there is .mere'eMphasis an tryinE to .,show children hoW. theY •can,
            besttake                                                             ir                          ree in .society, and in helping them. to choose their
            future jobsas careerS. e muSt not forgetthat while the parents'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                       •    •   .  _
            in-71aance a:1d help is most iportant znd-essenti71 in .these things, the 
            school is aImOS:t•tho first contact that children have with outside-. 
            society. This makes the things they lean- there of great individual and 
            n- Lional imporLa'_ce*
                                                                      odor:- education is designed6 not only to make it easier for
            children to decide their own careers, bu-', also to help them to ;Jake an 
            active -part in the f-,71:6-ire development of OUT nation. In the ;,ears to
            co!..ac t-efr voice will be the vefce of the nftion,These last few years. have underlined the rights- and the -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .      .
            -eriVileges that ustrc. liens 'find in their own country. It is our job to
       •    see that these-r-hts                                                                                                                                 1)rivileges are maintained and enhanced.
                                                                The decjjon of the nation at a general election is possibly . 
            the most sole:.an act. that the people can make together. The importance 
            lies not only 'La the immediatecaaseciUances..but also in the fact that • 
            our decision can leave • its mark for generations to come*. It is a:acciion
            •both for ourselves and for our children, Let us be sure that the DTbres.• 
            of the ..last three gears is continued so that the :children we are. educat- •
                        , for this nation will only know a free and enerGetic.eommtnity•that 
            is ,7etermined to develop its own ros.ources as a barrier against Communism
            and 0'-"---=-r unhappy political beliefs that lead anl4. to bloodshed and 
            hara8hip.

