<!--start metadata-->
Title: ANZUS treaty, inflation, strikes
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 7/11/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                          ^j-71-n,l.~

                  BROADCAST TALK                      For 3HA - November 7, 
                                                          3LK - November 8 
                                                          3YB - November 10


                  Hello Ladies and Gentlemen...


                  The basic strength and importance of the relationship
                  between Australia and the United States as been highlighted 
                  a-new in theast few days by the visit of the Prime 1'inister, 
                  Mr McMahon, to Washington.


                  His talks with. President Nixon emphasised again the 
                  continuing validity of the ANZUS treaty, now ratified by 
  •               the fourth successive United States administration, and one 
                  of the corner-stones of our Pacific Partnership with 
                  that country.


                  Mr McMahon has stated that the President has assured him 
                  America has no intention of pulling out completely from 
                  the Asian region.


                  Indeed the build-up of Soviet influence in this region
                  will continue to be matched.   To facilitate this the      gC vrsed
                  United States Secretary of Defence, 1'r Laird has          -
                  the use of Western Australian bases by U-S     1 forces. 
•                 These bases are at Cockburn Sound and Learmonth.


                  With the new role of Mainland Chinâlpoth regionally and 
                  internationally, the visit by gr gc ahon and his top 
                  level discussions with American officials will have 
                  far-reaching consequences in furthering our alliance.

                                                       BROADCAST . . . 2

     r


                  I would like to turn again to the serious financial squeeze 
                  brought about by rising costs and falling farm incomes

                  which                  in.



                  The government has introduced responsible fiscal measures
                  aimed at slowing the rate of inflation, including a considerable
                  reduction in immediate government expenditure, a review

                  of Tariff protection of many industries, and a reduction
                  in the migration intake.


                  However continuing industrial disputes and excessive wage 

 •                claims are continuing to push the inflationary spiral. 
                  In addition theLabor Party has now given its support to 
                  the ACTU's campaign for a 35—hour week.



                  Figures prepared by the Department of Primary Industry 
                  indicate how seriously such a reduction in theworking 

                  week would affect farm income.



                  For example if total farm labour costs, including the
                  owners labor,    considered the cost of producing each 

                  bushel of wheat would rise by 6 cents. When freight charges 
                  and materials are added the rise in production costs would 
                  be 14.3 percent, or 13 cents a bushel... a reduction in 
•                 profitability which would be quite disastrous.

                                                                                 ,` C
                  As far as woolgrowtrs are concerned    is estima*ed that

                  introduction Of a 35—hour week w. d incre .6b total

                  g.‘-fare andetransport sts by 20 percent.

                                  d        '                       )
                  Other primary 'ndustrés would be similarly affected.• 


                  As the Mira te for 'rimary-  du strg' Mr S 

                  recent                   g the Filicy

                                                   1'   e ~t

                           rúral in ustries

                  IIe saidP-e,/412 country,dreaswho are tempted ,i this ti

                  of ec omic :treseto rn to t     t Party ne  to be cor.zstious ,/' 
                  of   e coi.equence any swit   in politi al allegiansie's coul

                   ring.

   •

          As far as woolgrowers are concerned it is estimated that 
          introduction of a 35-hour week would reduce net incomes 
          by 40 per cent.

          In the dried vine fruits industry there would be a 
          reduction of one-third in net farm income. In the 
          dairying industry, according to the Department of Primary 
          Industry's figures, the net income would fall by 37 per cent.

          Other primary industries would be similarly affected.
 •        As the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair, said 
          recently those pursuing the policy of a 35-hour week 
          demonstrate little concern for rural industries.

          He said people in country areas who are tempted in this 
          time of economic stress to turn to that Party need to be 
          conscious of theconsequences any switch in political 
          allegiances could bring.




•

                                                                        BRCADCAr'T ...3


                       The Bureau of Agricultural Economics in Canberra has just 
                       issued a comprehensive publication on the "Rural Industry 
                       in Australia".

                       It is an excellent booklet which gives j complete details 
                      on all aspects of the rural industry at the present time, 
                       including Physical Environment, Land Settlement, an 
                      examination of the Rural Industry and the Economg , and 
                      Government Assistance to the Rural Industry.

                      Farmers, teachers, and others who would likesto have
   •                  this important information readily available can obtain 
                      copies of the booklet frm the Bureau of Agricultural 
                      Ecohomics, or write to me personally at Parliament House 
                      and I will forward you a copy.



                      It has been my priviledge in the past few days to carry 
                      out two operationsbn behalf of the Colleges of Advanced 
                      Education.

                      The first wain the House of Representativelast Thursday 
                      when I introduced the Bill to establish the Australian
411                   Commission on Advanced Education) t142, Astxv-e    a    j_„
                      The second was on Friday last when I had the honor of
                      presenting diplomas to graduates                the Warrnambool 
                      Institute .... young people who are very much proof of 
                      the success of this new tertiary education concept.

                      There are now more than 40 colleges of advanced education 
                      throughout Australia ... brought about in just six years 
                      since the programme was first begun. They are offering 
                      an extremely wide selection of courses, many to degree 
                      standard, and provide a vital alternative to students 
                      who do not wish to go to University but require higher 
                      education linked directly with particular vocations.

