<!--start metadata-->
Title: Red China
Description: press statement
Date: 27/09/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   PRESS STAT:i ENT                                                                                      September 27íh,1959
 . ML LCOLM FRAS tgi

                              Today I want to talk about Red China.

                              As there are 650,000,000 people in mainland China and as the 
   Communist Government is quite obviously in full power on the mainland, 

   many Australians have been attracted by what appears to be the obviously 

   fair thing, and that is to give diplomatic recognition to the Communist 

   Government. It is not easy to look at this question on a purely factual 

   basis and to avoid all emotion, but if we try to do that our Government's 

   case against recognition must be recognised as extremely strong under the 

   present circumstances. It is perhaps unfortunate that in previous years 

   the Government, in its official statement, has given the major reasons

   for non—recognition as being Communist China's aggressive foreign policy 
      repressive
   and/internal system. These may be reasons, but they are not the strongest

   ones nor are they the real ones.

                             This impression was put right by the Sinister for External 
 Affairs on Thursday, 13th August, when he gave a comprehensive statement 

 to the Parliament on the question of recognition, If it were possible 

 to recognise Communist China in the way that we recognise other countries, 

 without strings attached, then I think everyone would probably support 

 recognition of Communist China, but such is not the case. Communist China 

 has said quite emphatically and quite plainly that it will not accept 

 diplomatic relations with Formosa, inferring that Communist China must 

 be recognised as the legitimate ruler not only of mainland China but 

 also of the Island Republic of Formosa. The fact that Peking has laid 
 down these conditions completely alters the attitude of other countries 

 to diplomatic recognition of mainland China. In essence Communist China 

 is trying to dictate to us or to anyone else who might recognise her what 

 sort of foreign policy we should pursue. That is not something that we 

 could willingly allow.

                            Canada has perhaps more than any other country examined 

 this question of recognition of China and that country has come to the 

 conclusion, and I quote "that for the last several years Canada was 

 still not convinced that Peking would not use recognition to aggravate 

 rather than improve relations with Canada". "Should we", asked Mr. Smith, 

 their External Affaira Minister, "recognise mainland China until we have 

reason to believe that our act will not result in a deterioration of

relations 0.ther than the opposite".

               2

       It is worth while remembering that China has in other 
 ways tried to force other countries to adopt certain foreign policies. 
 Japan had an extensive trade treaty with Communist China, but when 
 Japan refused to alter its policies that trade treaty was immediately 
 cancelled.
       Advocates of recognition to Communist China say that 
 the United Kingdom 1v a recognised that country, therefore why 
 shouldn't Australia. This United Kingdom recognition did not 
 admit Peking's claim to Formosa, and it has therefore not resulted 
 in good relations with Communist China e.g., before recognition 
 the United Kingdom had £300 million of frozen assets in China, 
 After recognition these assets were confiscated. Since the United 
Kingdom recognition Peking has re—stated that recognition and 
 establishment of diplomatic relations can only be accepted from 
 those who sever ties with the present Government of Formosa.
       In considering this problem Australia should also 
remember that some 50 States other than Australia have not recognised 
the Chinese Communist Government. Only 33 countries have, and 
these include all the Communist block countries. Japan, South 
Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Malaya and the Philippines are all 
included emongot eountr{4s that have not recognised Communist China, 
These are all countries which have had an internal communist problem. 
which has, in many cases, been aggravated by action from China 
itself. If Australia, in isolation, recognised Communist China it
would certainly be regarded as a blow to the morale of those 
struggling against communism in these countries, especially in a 
country like Malaya which is a full democratic dominion in the
British Commonwealth.
       Further, Australia could not ignore the effect 
that recognition would have on her relationship with the United 
States, This would be involved in particular over the question of 
Formosa. The United States is pledged by treaty to protect that 
Country. Recognition in terms acceptable to Peking involves the 
abandonment of the free people of Formosa. This is something which 
would bring us into direct conflict with United States policy.

                    3 OS
        I don't think Australia would gain anything from
recognition of Communist China, but those who advocate recognition
probably think that so$e trade advantages would come to this
country. I believe that Communist China already buys everything
from us that she wants either directly or indirectly, and from
the nature of her own produce there is very little that we can
buy from her. On the other hand, under present circumstances,
recognition could result in great political loss for Australia
and South East Asia. It would disillusion many of the anti-
communists in other countries of South Laat Asia, especially
countries like Nalaya, and if we recognise Communist China in
terms acceptable to Peking it would mean a betrayal of the 10,000,000
people of Formosa who have amply demonstrated their dislike of
Communism,
        With the facts placed squarely before them I very
much doubt if the Australian people would be prgured to accept
these consequences. I realise very well that what 1 have been •
saying is not a popular line, but it is a point of view which
believe to be correct under present circumstances. If Peking
were to review its attitude then I am sure the matter would be
re-examined,

