<!--start metadata-->
Title: Export industries under threat
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 13/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                            13th April, 1973.

ST2/ ,~      C.     Z ~ ~ 
  TEM~NT CONCERN NG EgPORT I1~DIISTRIES UNDER THREAT 13
HON. MALCOLM FRASER LIBERAL PARTY SPOKESMAN FOR THE PRIMARY INDUSTRY.


  Rural industries are going to be in .for a difficult and hard 
time in negotiating with the Government. The two members who 
knew something of rural affairs, Dr Patterson and Mr Grassby, 
have been given no responsibility for rural affairs. The Prime 
Minister was not even prepared to have one of them as Acting 
Minister while Senator Wriedt is overseas. Senator Cavanagh, 
whose knowledge of the problems is no greater than Senator 
Wriedt's when he first began, is acting.

  A number of decisions have been taken without adequate 
consultation with Primary Industry leaders. This is one of 
the matters that gives most cause for concern. * I have heard 
of no rural organisation that wants a referendum on the merino 
embargo. The Government is determined to have one, despite the 
unanimois advice of the Executive of the Australian Wool Industry 
Conference. It is determined to have one because the organisation 
which controls Labour Party members has said it must.

* Without consultation rural reconstruction funds were cut in 
half and an attempt was made to increase the interest rate - 
an attempt which was thwarted by the States.

* Rural industries which have lost up to $200,000,000 have been 
virtually ignored in revaluation compensation, despite the fact 
that Mr. Crean before Christmas said that the Government would 
keep to the principles and practices of the previous Government. 
It was not long after that that Senator Wreidt made it plain that 
our practices had been thrown out of the window.

* We now come to the incredible situation in which revaluation 
compensation was announced on 11th April, for secondary industries 
where they are significant exporters, but not to primary industries.

* We have had an Electoral Bill introduced which I believe the 
Senate will reject, which was opposed by the Liberal Party and the 
Country Party in the House of Representatives. This Bill will move 
up to ten seats from large country areas where members have great

                                2.
r       problems of distance interviewing their electors in the remote areas, 
        to the metropolitan areas. The Labor Government's legislation will 
        mean that there will be less voters in seats in the developing 
        metropolitan areas than there would be in electorates like Kennedy 
        or Wannon or Kalgoorlie. It's a ludicrous situation and one 
        designed to perpetuate Labor rule. The object is to destroy the
        country voice in Parliament. It's only the first step, because we 
        have been served notice that if they ever regain Government, first 
        past the post voting will be introduced with disastrous results for 
        small parties and for all anti-socialist forces.

               Before the elections we were told by the Labor Party that 
        they would provide $500,000,000 at 3% interest to primary producers. 
        That promise has been overlooked. Instead they cut rural recon- 
        struction funds in half.

               What they have done with wool research and promotion funds 
        for the International Wool Secretariat represents an enormous change 
        from the previous Government's policies. The decisions announced 
        recently have indicated a 70% increase for the grower contribution 
        and a one third reduction in the Government contribution.

               The Minister for Primary Industry has made it quite plain 
        that the Government is not bound by our previous policies and that 
        Government sponsored research for all rural industries is being 
        reviewed. It would be more correct to say that it is under threat.

        *      One of the matters that must give general cause for concern
        is the fact that most of these changes have been taken without the 
        intimate and close consultation that used to prevail between the 
        previous Government and Primary Industry organisations. Primary 
        Producers now know that whatever advice they offer will not be 
        able to prevail against the doctrinaire views of the governors of 
        the Labor Party.

        *      The Labor Party has made many promises. With a budget
        deficit approaching $1,000,000 they are going to have more than a 
        little difficulty in fulfilling those promises.

               Mr. Whitlam has appointed a Demolition Squad to advise him 
        on areas of government spending that could be pruned and altered.

                          3.
This team headed by Dr. Coombs will be looking to cut funds in 
the Rural Industry Areas. It is a task force that primary 
industry organisations will need to watch with concern.

*       All this means in the Queensland context that Mr. Harden
has run over Dr Patterson completely and absolutely. In his own 
Party Dr Patterson is politically dead. I regret this because 
he had some understanding of primary industry matters, but on 
the issues which concern this Labor Government Dr Patterson has 
no influence and can point to no decision that would be of any 
advantage to the rural industries.

*       This is the background to a new situation that is developing.
We are now threatened with Australia's meat trade being disrupted - 
not only by unions, but by arbitrary Government action. There are 
reports that the Government is considering measures that would 
arbitrarily curtail exports.

        I am told that two proposals are under consideration - one 
a 30% export tax, or secondly a quota on exports. Either proposal 
would be quite disastrous. While it's true that meat prices have 
risen significantly in recent months, it's my understanding that 
meat prices now have about the same relation to the average wage 
as they had ten years ago. Australian householders have
benefited from low meat prices in recent years because of drought 
and forced selling in many instances.

        It should be noted that an average Australian works less 
time to buy lamb or beef than his counterpart in the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden or France. The 
drought is now over, owners are restocking and there's a 
scarcity which always occurs after the breaking of a genes ii 1 
Australia-wide drought. If the Government were to use these 
circumstances to provide an excuse for arbitrarily limiting 
exports, great damage would be done to the confidence of the 
meat industry and great damage would be done to our reputation 
as a reliable trading partner.

        It is not always realised that our meat exporters undertake 
forward commitments. They sign firm contracts to deliver 
specific quantities and types of meat a long while ahead. If

 their contracts were upset by arbitrary government action our 
 reputation would be severely damaged. Markets that we have 
 developed would be exploited by other producers.

         If there was an arbitrary reduction of supplies to the 
 United States under present circumstances, we would have precisely 
 the situation in which the United States would be inclined to devote 
 not tens, but hundreds of millions of dollars to the development 
 of synthetic meats. She would do this for two reasons, to reduce 
 her requirements for overseas funds, and secondly to reduce her 
 dependence upon a country that had branded itself as an unreliable 
 trading partner.

         The meat industry faces a very serious situation indeed. 
 Unfortunately the complete lack of sympathy and understanding that 
 the Government has shown for rural matte s canive,us no cause to 
 believe they will act in the interests df Austria in-this matter.
-iitrary restrre.ons._ Would  alsAjpe_.:, nast a._.. - their
 activit es The      ernm&st-le-ft---w_nQ__ --44,
 are- . m.and   ct rï r zs_:_con.~ ,,s e     # the o      nment..
 phi zsó s ___ _-=--_mat kin ,-demand.

