<!--start metadata-->
Title: What the South Vietnamese do for themselves
Description: radio talks
Date: 8/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                              ~.~ zk+P —rw~>ç~O•~ 4.ci tr-1


                                                             8 September 1967

              WHAT THE SOUTH VIETNAMESE DO FOR THEMSELVES
                  Statement by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser

           Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Wannon, said recently that 
there are some who believe that the South Vietnamese are not doing very 
much for themselves. This belief, he said, is quite unjust.

           Up to early 1965 the South Vietnamese were getting no combat 
 support, they were suffering great casualties. This and the deliberate 
 terrorist assassinations by the Viet Cong led to a shortage of experienced 
 personnel in the South Vietnamese Army. Since 1966 much has been retrieved 
 and the quality of their military units has now greatly improved.

           Many of their units are fighting extremely well. In our own 
 province area a platoon of 26 men held off a reinforced Viet Cong battalion 
 for several hours before relief from our task force arrived. This was an 
 heroic action.

            In general terms military units in the South Vietnamese Army are 
 fighting well and hard. The 1st Division in 1 Corps has had a continuous 
 record of victories against the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese. It has been 
 on operations for 28 days out of every month this year and has conducted 
 over 90 operations of battalion size or larger. Although he doesn't like 
 the score—board method of indicating victory he said this Division has 
 killed over 5,000 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong for the loss of 1,000 of its 
 own men.

            He stated that the South Vietnamese are also working well in the 
 Civil field. 30,000 men have now been trained to take their places in 
 Revolutionary Development Teams. These are people who are selected from 
 several villages. They are trained and then return to their own areas. 
 Their purpose is to assess the needs of the people and then to help them 
 improve their own standards. They are not designed to step in and do all 
 the work for the villagers, rather they work and co—operate with them and 
 encourage them to do things for themselves.

            Mr. Fraser said there are five of these teams operating in our 
 area of responsibility and the Australian Civil Affairs unit is actively 
 working with them.

