<!--start metadata-->
Title: ANZAC Day
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 23/04/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                          AWAC DAY 

                                      Malcolm Fraser, leember for nnon.AINIIIIMIIIMMINYI•111111•40.111•1111...M111.11M

                           Last Friduys people throughout all Australia commemorated 

Anzac Day. ito-ene nee reminding that Anzac Day commemorates in 

pertieular tee exploits of the Australia:land New Zealand :Army Corps 

during tJhoo first World ear. It people recull tiny particular instance 

to mind in which troops of these two countries played u joint and 

magnificent pert they would think of the beeches and cliffs of

Gallipoli. Against. insuperable odds with great courage uad fortitude, 

the Anzac forces played their pert megnificently.

                           iguee tho dupi ur GUtpoU the word "Anzac" has come tò take 

on a wider weauleg for Australians. Anzac Day has como to sylabolise our 

everlasting respece send gratitude to the wall who fought to keep this
country free -                                   paxticuIer, to the men who died to keep tide country 

free. There 4th) greater sacrifice hilt can be made by eny person 

when their fueily and their whole future life is given up so that other 

people AU y oujoy the thiues whlen Anzacs end others have died to protect.

                           We cannot now and we never shell forget the debt thet we owe.

   Luce the first Great War the number of sAosa %laws we honour has, 

unfortuudetly, been made much greeter by to wur egeins llitler -eed by 

the war agulust the JaiAuese and, more recently, by tile war in Korea. 

Remembrance of these things alone is not suffioieut. Remembrauce of
           what happened end what could happen again must stiffen our revolution 

 to play our part today to ate that the eecessity for those supreme 

 sacrifices does not arise agAini.
                           Mn of he Australian Armed kiervices have fought for freedom, 

 for democraey, for the country they love; for thiir fcmilies end their 
 relatives and for the right to lead their own lives unhampered and free. 

 They fought for these things thee we might enjoy tlea. They will have 

died in vain unleash we seen protect them not only for ourselves but for
 our children.

                            Australians so often take those things for granted because

 in this country we have never known war on our own shores and because 
 internationel events hove often seemed remote. A small war in another 

 part of the world has been greeted with the attitude "It is a tragedy
 but one that does not concer us".                                                                          Over the last few months and

 ;446 I believe Australians hew: given up this uttitude of remoteness 
 and ieolation, The fast-changieg world with aeropleues that can do 
 up to 1,040 :Ales an hour; with the horrors of rocket weapons that 
 can travel from one continent to another without any hummn pilot on 
 board - these things have brought home to our mind all too forcibly 
 the That that we are a part of this world aad will share whutever 
 general fate people act in store for theneelves by their own eetions.
         we can and we do, as ter ae we can with our limited
resources end capacity play our pert in strengthening the free world. 
This is not only something wnich Governments can do, It is roc 
 in which individuals themselves ieside their own couatry wen play an
important part.   It is worth remeer1nj. how many countrles of the
world have lost their freedom. Ina couetries of .e4stern 'europe; the
politioal take-overs in Czechoslovakia and Hungary which happened in 
the late 1940s. Before these take-overs by Commuelet parties Leese 
countries used to have free elections with e ohoiee of oendidetee for 
which people could cast their vote. since these take-overs, US in 
Russia, there is now one candidate end yeu vote for hie whetner you
like it or not.  •uite olearly, under theee circumstance, voting 
and democracy are merely a glib mockery. In HUngery two years ago 
the University students and the workers attempted to rebel agelnat 
this, they were brutally suppressed. 0nly last meet!, when visiting 
Hungury, Mr. Erushohev sail; "We (moaning the Lussions) will support 
Communist Governments everywhere by foroe of area, if necesaery". 
That imams that, If necessary, the Russian tanks woula once more 
plough through the crowds of Hungarien people.
         This is something which we find difficult to understand 
because if yeu want to Wattage yeur Government. you vote for a different 
candidate at the elections but if what r. 1rushehev said In to be 
taken es correct, is people in Communist domineted countries like 
Hungary or Czechoslovakia or goland or Seat Germany wishto cnange 
their form of Government than their attegpt will be stoppee by force 
of Russian arms.

4                      INS3

          NY= though allianoes and friendships in this fast- 
  *hanging world have, over IDO years, changed considerably, it is 
  worth noting that whenever the 4kzacs fought in the field of battle 
  they fought for the kind of thing which we believe in and which we 
  love, against the kind of domination which Communism enforces 
  on so many people of the world, Hitler attempted to dominat 
  Xurope. Fie failed. Japan attempted to dominate South Eastern Asia, 
  the Islands of the iacific and ultimately !,ustralia and failed.
   ny country or person who tries to dominate and enslave by open 
  or subversive means the people of the world will also fail. Howe 
  they will only fail if we remember the spirit or Anzac Day and of 
  the people who fought for the things in which they believed.
          The spirit of the Anzacs must strengthen our resolution, 
  It must wake us determined that this country shall forever remain 
  free.
          It is our job, and particularly etaak of younger
  people who were too young to take an active part in these previous 
  struggles, to do what we can in peacetime to see that the ;Vizecs 
  414 not fight in vain

