<!--start metadata-->
Title: Taxation and the constitution
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 7/04/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  RADIO: 3NA - Sunday 7th April
                      3193 - Wednesday, 10th April
      MALCOLM FRAS R, UR BER FOR tiANNON
           comments on
        TAXATION AND 'ME CMSTITUTION

r
     One of the first jobs that iarliament did w

 re-assembled was to pass a Bill which made it possible for the all- 

 Party Committee on Constitutional Reform. to continue its heaarint . 

     There ere many problems that this Committee will consider

 but among the most importi t should be the clue:.., Lion of uniform taxation. 

 I think everyone knows - certainly everyone in Victoria knows - that this 

 particular rotate is cha.l.enging uniform taxation in the High Court,

 but whatever say be the legal outcome of that particular struggle, it 
     firm
 is my own/belief that this particular problem should be solved on a

 political level in the interests of every Australian. There is no 

 reason to say or to believe that the legal out co ne will be the best 

 political outcome for the smooth and democratic government of the 

 States an4/of the Commonwealth.

     The Commonwealth Goverment at the present time has greet

 ower and great responsibility. Among its paware is the power to tax 

 and, with the exception caf the monies raised by the Loan Council, it 

 has power to say Yes or No to many requests from tie States for extra 

 funds. With this power, the Commonwealth carries extraordinarily 

 heavy responsibilities. It must account to the taxpayers of Australia 

 for the money it raises and for the money it spende. It is

 responsible not only for the money that it spends on its own account 

 but also, in part at least, for the money that it makes available to

 the States.

      As the main financial power is the country, it is responsible 

 for pursuing policies of full employment and stability and, from time 

 to time, it mutt use its powers to see that full employment and our 

 national progress are maintained. It le, perhaps, easier for the 

 Commonwealth to do this under a system of uniform taxation than it would 

 be with six semi-independent States also levying their own taxes; but 

 another consideration comes in which I now believe is more important. 

 It is a plain fact that Governments that have the power to spend money 

 should also have the responsibility lbr raising that money.

                  2 ..

       I think you will all be able to bring to mind countless

occasions In the past when a Mate has asked for more money to do this 

or to do that and nearly always it will be for a worthy read for a just

cause. And the Commonwealth must reply either Yes or ho, taking 
into e000unt general eoanomie considerations.

       It is wrong that properly elected State Governments of the 
people of Australia should have th=:: power to spend moue, without the 

responsibility for raising that money. It lowers their dignity and the 
status of their Government if they mta t cantinually ask the Commonwealth 
Can we do this? Will you give us some money for this or that? It is 
bad for the Commonwealth itself to have the power to say to the States
Yes or No when it concerns a function that belongs strictly to the 
States.
       I think there are few people who will seriously disagree 
with this and although I know it is Opposition policy that power should 

be centralised at Canberra, I believe there are many things that the
States can do for themselves far better than the Commonwealth could and 
we don't want to see too much power concentrated in one place.
       The whole situation is summed up, I think, in this way.
If a Government has power tonspend money without the responsibility for 
raising that money then it may become irresponsible. It can oontinuell. 
blame the Comaonwealh for not doing the things that it wants to do 
and it is extraordinarily dit `icult for the people themselves to judge 
whether it is the State or the Commonwealth that is to blame. On the 

othe_ hand, if the Commonwealth has the power to raise allmthe money
mad has the power to give money to the States - to say Yes or LA say 
Wo - then that in itself can lead to its own obvious abuses.///

    1 hope the States are forced to tax themselves once 
more ao that they may meet their oblifations without constant calls 
on the Comminwealth, If, however, the Uniform Tax laws are valid 
then politically we should seek ways and means of forcing the 3tatee 
to accept their respons iti li ti e8. A few years ago when Ix. lienz iea 
offered the States their taxing power, not one !tate accepted. Since 
then, Victoria has realised she must regain her taxing powers it the 
State Government is to retain its true status and responsibility. 
Other States should rollow her example.
    If Uniform Tax remains, more and more duties will devolve 
upon the Commonwealth and the Staten will eventually cease to be 
importfa t organs of government. This wst not happen.
4/4/57.

