<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence talks
Description: radio talks
Date: 29/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT
                   29 September 1967
MALCOLM FRASER


        DEFENCE TALKS
     Statement by Malcolm Fraser, 
     Federal Member for Wannon
    This week the Prime Minister announced the visit 

to Australia next week of the Prime Minister of New Zealand, 

Mr Holyoake, and his Minister for Defence, Mr Thompson. This 

visit will be brief but none the less welcome, and is being 

made at the invitation of our own Prime Minister. It will 

provide the first opportunity for our two heads of state to 

discuss at first hand the implications for Australia and New 

Zealand of Britain's Defence White Paper issued in July this 

year, which for the first time gave notice of the British 

intention to withdraw from South East Asia over a period of 

time. New Zealand and Australia will certainly not be able 

to and will not attempt to step into British shoes in this 

part of the world and the pattern of security arrangements 

that will emerge will be different from those that have existed 

up to this time. All the countries that are concerned are 

examining the implications of British withdrawal and in the 

long term there will be discussions and negotiations amongst 

them all to work out the best arrangements for the future 

security of the region. I believe Austria will play a 

leading part in these developments.

~
   PRESS STATEMENT

   MALCOLM FRASER         29 September 1967





                 ABORIGINAL WELFARE
              Statement by Malcolm Fraser, 
               Federal Member for Wannon



       In May this year the people of Australia carried a referendum
   giving the Commonwealth Government the power to make special laws for
   aboriginals. In most States, there are already laws which allow special
   provisions for assistance of Australia's indigenous people. It is not
   intended that the Commonwealth will take over the full responsibility for
   aboriginal welfare, but its most important function should now be to carry
   out a policy co—ordinating role. This should make it easier for the
   Commonwealth and States to share the experience gained in the past in the
   most constructive and meaningful ways of furthering the interests of our
   aboriginal citizens.
       To achieve this object the Prime Minister has recently announced
   that the Government will establish an Office of Aboriginal Affairs in Canberra
   Its task will be to co—ordinate policy and provide the machinery necessary
   for joint consultations as the need arises with the States and the relevant
   Commonwealth departments. This new office will come under the Prime Minister's
   own administration and will draw on the experience of the Department of Territories,
   which will also provide administrative support for the new office where necessary.
   This office should not only facilitate communications between the Premiers of
   the States and the Prime Minister on aboriginal affairs, but should also provide
   a special avenue of communication with the Government by aboriginals themselves
   or the organisations representing them.
       In keeping with the increasing emphasis on aboriginal affairs, the
   Victorian State Government has this week announced that it will abolish the
   Aborigines Welfare Board and establish a Ministry and Department of Aboriginal
   Affairs. This will create a more effective administration.
       To date this year the Commonwealth has provided *4,500,000 for
   aboriginal advancement — this is a 27% increase on last year's expenditure.
   But it would be wrong to assume that just by spending large sums of money we
   will eradicate all the problems which arise in connection with aboriginals.
   In fact, if the money that is provided is not spent with great care and foresight,
   I think it is fair to say that additional problems could be created and
   existing ones accentuated. The problems are basically human ones and will only
   be overcome by a mutual recognition of them as such, by both Europeans and
   Aboriginals.

