<!--start metadata-->
Title: University funding
Description: radio talk
Date: c1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


By Mr Malcolm Fraser, Minister for Education and Science 
and Member for Wannon


                                     In 1956 the Commonwealth and the States began a partnership 
which has put more than $1300 million into the development of univer- 
sities since that time. Australia needed. rapid university development 
and I think we can take some pride in the achievement since then., 
Certainly we have performed a good deal better than the United 
Kingdom. For a population about five times ours they plan to have 
225,000 university students by 1972 or 1973. With our much smaller 
population we already have about 100,000 university students.
                                     University education is not the only form of tertiary 
education, especially in this State where a system of technical colleges 
and'institutes has been established with a very fine reputation. These 
colleges are now being broadened in scope and while they will still 
concentrate on vocational subjects they will also teach something of 
the liberal arts. However, in the years up till 1964-65 the technical 
colleges were the poor cousins in the tertiary education field. 
Significant Commonwealth and State support had been directed towards 
universities. But it is only since 1964 that the Commonwealth and 
the States had co—operated in the full development of the advanced 
colleges.
                                     The Committee of Inquiry into the Future of Tertiary Education 
in Australia recommended that the Commonwealth and the States toggther 
support what later came to be known as colleges of advanced educa ion, 
and pointed out their importance to Australia. The Commonwealth and the 
States accepted this recommendation and we are now in the middle of the 
first triennial period of development of these advanced colleges 11
which the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, the Swinburne I
Technical College, the Ballarat School of Mines and the Gordon
Institute'would be notable examples. In this first three year period roughly $100 million will be                                                                                                                                                   i
spent by the Commonwealth and the States on the development of these 
colleges, and the Commonwealth Advisory Committee on Advanced Education 
is now preparing recommendations of needs for the second three—year 
developmental period.
                                     These colleges are important for at least two major reaons. 
They are important because we believe that opportunities should bell 
provided to enable individual students to develop their own talents 
to the full. It is quite clear that the sort of education offered;

                  . —2—


at universities does not suit all students who are perfectly
capable of continuing their education beyond secondary schooling.
       Secondly, the colleges are important because universities
alone are not and will not meet all the needs of Australian
industry and commerce. Many industries look to employ a significant
number of diplomates from the advanced colleges. I have been advised
by some industrialists that they would sooner employ a diplomate from
an advanced college than a graduate with a pass degree from a
university. Employment and salary prospects of such diplomates are very
good indeed.
       Because there have been vigorous efforts over recent
months to get the Warrnambool Technical College properly recognise.
in Victoria it may help if I give some indication how procedures
work.
       The Victoria Institute of Colleges was established by the
Victorian Government to advise it on the development of such colleges
in Victoria. The Institute was given the power to affiliate colleges.
Under present legislation the Victorian Government has no power to
direct that a certain college should be affiliated. The Victoria Institute
of Colleges will make its recommendation to the Victorian Ministerlconcern-
ing the next three—year developmental period. The Victorian Minister
would examine these recommendations. The Victorian Government would
then make its decisions concerning them before sending them to the
Commonwealth. It should be remembered that what the Victoria Institute
of Colleges suggests are recommendations. They cannot be binding.
Matters included in their recommendations could be omitted when thq
Victorian Government finally makes its conclusions. Matters excluded
from the V.I.C. recommendations could be included in the Victorian
Government's recommendation to the Commonwealth.
       The Commonwealth has always taken the view that the States
best know where new institutions should be established or where
colleges should be developed within their own State boundaries.
       I believe this view is a correct one, although I hope In ay
be permitted again to speak as representative for this area when I say
it is important for Victoria that a tertiary educational institution
should be fully developed in Western Victoria. At the moment no such

      •
               --3-
                          •
institution exists west of Ballarat or Geelong.
     There is a technical college at Warrnambool and surely
it is logical to build on what is already at Warrnambool to service
the whole district.
     I know the V.I.C. has placed some importance on the degree
of local support. But anything that can be done to strengthen that 
support would be helpful. in obtaining a notable advance in educational 
facilities in Western Victoria.

