<!--start metadata-->
Title: Humbug and deception - education
Description: Statement
Date: 31/05/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


STATEMENT BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, Molp 3


               HUMBUG AND DECEPTION




On 20 June in 1972 the present Prime Minister said 
on State aid that the Labor Party "will support 
any forms of benefit already existing." The Prime 
Minister was speaking of the actions the Labor 
Party would take when it got into government.

On 13 December the Prime Minister wrote to Mr 
Dixon, Chairman of the National Council of 
Independent Schools, and he said

     "Per capita grants to non-Government 
     schools for the year 1973 will be paid 
     at the rates already approved for 1973 
     under the provisions of that Act - 
     that is, $62 per primary pupil and $104
     per secondary pupil. Commencing in 1974 
     additional Commonwealth contributions 
     towards the running costs of non-
     Government schools will be determined on 
     the basis of relative need, as assessed 
     by the Interim Committee and subsequently 
     by the Australian Schools Commission."

Those words plainly meant that the per capita 
payments would continue, but that additional 
recommendations would be on a basis of relative 
need, striking at areas of particular hardship. 
What in fact has happened is that all Common- 
wealth grants for running costs, not only the 
additional. ones, will be paid on the new basis

Those concerned with independent schools believe 
these commitments of the Prime Minister were 
reinforced by the terms of reference of the Karmel 
Committee, especially by term of reference 3b, which 
said that grants recommended by the Interim Committee 
will be "in addition to existing Commonwealth 
commitments".

The undertakings given by the Prime Minister on more 
than one occasion and thei*ain meaning of that term 
of reference of the Karmel Committee was undermined 
by the Minister for Education's letter of April 13. 
Last year I constantly said that it was the Labor 
Party's intention to phase out per capita grants and 
not accept some obligation for every Australian 
schoolchild. This is now demonstrated fact.

           20



The Karmel Committee on page 6 refers to the 
letter written by the Minister for Education. 
In that letter the Minister for Education 
clearly states that the per capita grants will 
be continued in 1973, but that payments beyond 
1973 will be on the basis of assessments of 
needs and priorities. Knowing the history of 
the Labor Party's activities in this matter, 
that could only be taken as a clear direction 
to end the across the board per capita grants.
The Minister has in fact contradicted himself. 
On the one hand he wrote an unofficial letter 
on April 13, the plain meaning of which is a 
direction to end per capita grants, especially 
when it is coupled with the policy documents of 
the Labor Party, but in the Parliament on 
Wednesday, 30 May, he said that he believed 
that all schools, including Geelong Grammar, 
should get a basic grant, and that the 
Commonwealth should have an identity with the 
education of every child.

If the Minister for Education really believes 
that he should have expressed that view in the 
letter he sent to the Karmel Committee, the 
letter which on any plain reading of the terms 
must indicate the Government's decision to end 
per capita grants on the basis of which they have 
been known in the past.

So we not only have Mr Whitlam's commitments 
publicly given, on several occasions repudiated. 
We have the Minister contradicting his own letter 
by a statement he made in the Parliament The 
deception and the humbug involved in this matter 
will be judged for what they aree I would like to 
make it quite plain that the deception is Mr 
Whitlam's, the humbug the Minister's.

