<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government, loans, unemployment, rural policy
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 17/11/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                      Embargo 6.00 p.m.
 ELECTORAL STATEMENT      17th November,1974.

         THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 
               RADIO TALK

The Labor Government has jumped over the fence. Many of the things it
 said it would not do it has now done, but too little and much too late. 
Unemployment is knocking on the door of 200,000.

Tragically I. expect the February figures to be not less than 350,000. 
100,000 of these could be school leavers unable to get jobs. What. the 
Government has done, I believe, will not help this situation. They
have made credit slightly easier to get but we have yet to see how that. 
works out.

They are frantically trying to attract money from overseas. Dr Cairns 
has been wooing funds from Wall Street.

The reduction in income tax is welcome and will provide momentary relief 
from inflation for lower income people. But the 22% cut in company tax- 
ation is hardly enough to persuade companies to plan and invest for
the future and provide the job opportunities which can only be provided 
in the private enterprise sector of the Australian economy.

An investment allowance should have been re-established. Special meas- 
ures should have been introduced to give companies a real stimulus to
make forward plans now and to execute those plans. The government has 
done none of this.

Let me indicate in plain terms how the present circumstances are affec- 
ting every business in Australia. If the corner grocery store normally 
carried $100,000 worth of stock, because of inflation, if they are to 
run the service and normal lines they carry on their shelves, they are 
now going to need $120-125,000. Every business in Australia is affected 
in the same way. To maintain last year's level of activity they have 
got to find the extra money. If they can't find the extra money the 
only alternative is to reduce the stocks, to reduce the goods held and
thus reduce their services to the public. That is what businesses are 
being forced to do.

Last week's measures won't alter that situation. I therefore believe 
that the Government's measures will not provide any significant stim- 
ulus to employment. I wish they would and I would be among the first
to give the government credit if I believed its actions were going to 
reduce the harm to the Australian community.

At the same time the Government has ignored the rural sector of the

                             ,,/2

                              2.

community. The meat and wool industries are suffering grievously as a 
result of inflation and as a result of a quite disastrous fall in prices.

The Government offered a few pious words but nothing else. If the Gov- 
ernment was serious in alleviating the problem of rural industries it 
would immediately re-instate the super bounty and refer the matter to 
the Industries Assistance Commission for a report. On a number of oc- 
casions the Prime Minister has indicated that it is open to the rural 
community to make an application for assistance from the Industries 
Assistance Commission. The Prime Minister fails to point out that in 
July an application was made but the Government refused to refer it to 
the Commission because there was no evidence of hardship according to 
the Government.

So the rural community are the forgotten people.

It is worth recording also that the redistribution proposed by the Aus- 
tralian Labor Party would wipe out, as I predicted, five or six rural 
seats throughout Australia and transfer them to the cities. They are 
set on destroying the political influence of people outside the great 
cities.

The measures that the Government announced will, over the next year, add 
to the inflation because the Government is maintaining its own programmes 
for command over more and more Australian resources. The size of the 
national cake in any one year is finite. The Government plainly says 
that it wants to decide how a larger slice of that cake is spent. They 
don't say that that means there is less of the cake to share amongst the 
Australian people and businesses.

Since the Government is going to maintain its own demand for resources, 
the competition between the Government and private people will remains 
In the first few months of this year Government expenditure is up 40% 
over last year and it madly pretends all its posidomm can still be ful- 
filled without harm to Australia.

This is not giving individuals, the private enterprise sector of our 
economy, room to breathe and live. The Prime Minister also said that 
as a result of the Government's measures there would be wage restraint, 
but a number of union leaders have already said that it won't achieve 
that. - that it won't moderate their demands.

If wage demands are to continue as they have this year there is little 
prospect of inflation being less than 30% next year.

All this has been caused by things happening within Australia by Austral= 
ian based policies. The Prime Minister tried to say that ourAlifts were 
caused by overseas events but the effect of a four-fold incriâse in 
world petrol prices has not hit Australia and that is the major reason
                            0/3

 r


                               30

why there is a rapid increase in world wide inflation.

Secondly, inflation is running rampant in the western world because of 
wage pressures in nearly every country. Even though that is a common 
factor the wage pressures generated by union demands in Australia can't 
be blamed on the British or American trade union movement.

Frank Crean who as I write this is still Treasurer said only two weeks 
ago that higher wages are taking jobs away from other people. That is 
about the truest thing he ever said and it is a tragedy that it is not 
widely recognised.

Nobody could have believed two years ago that this Labor Government in a 
short period of something less than two years could have destroyed the 
stability and predictability, which we have become accustomed to in 
Australia, so quickly. Nobody could have believed that a stable economy 
could have been destroyed causing concern and fear in every home in the 
minds of every family throughout Australia - impoverishing the retired 
and destroying the weak.

Nobody could have believed that the Government's bungling could have 
been of this order. The Prime Minister is a formidable and astute op- 
ponent, but his verbal capacity can't hide the performance of his gov- 
ernment which deserves the condemnation of every Australian.

