<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States and the common market
Description: press statement
Date: 20/05/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  •






 RADIO TALK                                  WEEK ENDING 20TH MAY 1962.


                 AUSTRALIA THE UNITED KINGDOM THE
                 UNITED STATES  AND THE COMMON KINGDOM,

         In the last two or three months we have seen and heard a 
 very great deal of what Australia is doing to preserve its trading 
 position if the United Kingdom joins the Common Market. There 
 have been many statements. There has recently been a debate in 
 the Parliament. The Australian Government - in particular, the 
 Minister for Trade - have expressed very real concern for the future 
 of Australia's trade relationships if the United Kingdom should join. 
 Obviously, any Australian Government would have to do what it can, 
 as ours has, to preserve the legitimate trading interests of 
Australian exporters. This is the first objective of the Australian 
Government, as I hope it would be of any Australian Government.

         However, in fighting for our own interests, we can get this 
whole Common Market matter out of perspective if we do not keep in 
mind the aims and objectives of other nations.

         The main motive for the Common Market is political and not 
economic. As the United States Secretary of State said, at a 
dinner given in Canberra in his honour last week the people of 
Europe and of the United States hope that unity in Europe will make 
a sure foundation of peace in Western Europe. For over 1,000 years, 
Europe has been torn by wars arising from jealousies and rivalries 
between the nations of Western group. We, in this decade, look 
like seeing these nations brought together in a kind of unity which 
will make these wars impossible. To me, this seems to be an objective 
that transcends almost any commercial economic objective that anyone 
might have. Quite obviously, when you look at the political motive 
for the unity of Europe in the forming of a Common Market, the move 
can only be a real success if the United Kingdom joins because the 
United Kingdom is one of the most significant countries in Europe.

        If the United Kingdom does not join, if our own loudly voiced 
objections about the possible harm to our trade, prevented the 
United Kingdom from joining, as it is not impossible they could, then 
we should think what the consequences might be. The United Kingdom 
would become not much more than an offshore island with a giant on 
her doorstep in Europe and another giant across the Atlantic. She 
would be so preoccupied with relationships between these two groups, 
and particularly with her own relationship to the European Common 
Market countries that she would have less time for the Commonwealth 
than she now has and the Commonwealth itself would have less 
influence in world affairs.

        If the United Kingdom does join,
she will be able to work from within the Common Market to make the 
Common Market countries outward looking. Once Europe is unified 
in some degree there is a much greater possibility that the Common 
Market countries will look outside Europe and take a greater part in 
assisting under-developed nations to achieve a degree of stability 
and prosperity.

        The United States, for example, has for some time wanted 
some of the burden that she herself bears, taken by the prosperous 
countries of Europe. It is not always known that for every person 
in the United States 300 dollars is spent by the United States on aid 
to 75 different countries around the world. This is money spent by 
the United States taxpayer. The United States most justifiably 
believes that the prosperous European countries should take a greater 
part of this burden than they have in the past. This is not to say 
that some European countries have not done a great deal in this






                -2-

  direction. The United Kingdom has, but more thap any other, France, 
  despite all her difficulties, despite her wars in Indo China and 
  Algeria, has spent more on foreign aid than any other European 
  country, possibly more than the rest of Europe put together. With 
  a French influence looking outward and with a British influence 
  looking outward, both working from within the Common Market,
  countries would become less introspective and less concerned with 
  purely European affairs. Indeed, once their own rivalries are 
  put to rest, the possibility for taking a greater part in ensuring 
  the peace of the world will be very real. Third countries, I believe, 
  whether they be Commonwealth countries or some other country, have 
  no right to prevent this great movement being successful. Some 
  arguments have been used which seem to imply that we have the right 
  to prevent the United Kingdom entering the Common Market.

      It is a gross impertinence on the part of people who argue 
  in this way. The United Kingdom Government must act for the people 
  of the United Kingdom. It cannot act for Australians as the 
  Australian Government can't act for the United Kingdom.

      If the United Kingdom Government has come to a decision, 
  as it appears to have, that United Kingdom survival in a large 
  degree depends upon entering the Common Market, how can we, as 
  Australians, pretend that we have a right to prevent them.

     When you look upon the sacrifices that the United Kingdom 
  has made in two world wars sacrifices which have reduced the
  United Kingdom from being the greatest world power to being a power 
  which some people today say is not of great significance, how can 
  we object to measures that they believe are necessary for their own 
  survival.

     One other point I want to make. Recently, Dean Rusk a 
  most impressive Secretary of State for the United States, has quite 
  plainly told us where the United States stands on the remnants 
  of British preferences. We should understand that the United 
  States has always pursued this attitude. After the crash of 1929 
  and the depression of the '30's, we find the Ottawa Agreement which 
  enshrines British preference developed in a large measure to keep 
  the dollar out of the Empire as it then was. The United States 
  looks upon British preference as a move originally designed against 
  the dollar. Under these circumstances, can you wonder that the 
  United States does not love the preferential system?

     This is a matter of history. As for the present, it is 
  my belief that adequate right of access to the Common Market countries 
  would prevent serious harm to our own trading interests.

     I do not think we need preference over third countries to 
  be able to sell our commodities adequately so long as we are 
  allowed to sell the volume we have previously sold to the United 
  Kingdom.

     Right of access is more important than preference. If we 
  have no right of access in sufficient quantity then we would
  certainly be in real difficulty. There is reason to believe that 
  we would get this right of access.

     It is also ironical that while the United States is making 
  the greatest possible move that history has ever seen for the 
  reduction of trading tariffs Australia has experienced a period 
  of severe protectionism due to an outcry by our own manufacturers. 
  President Kennedy is seeking powers from Congress to reduce tariffs 
  of the United States right across the board by as much as 80 %. 
  He wants this power to enable him to bargain with the Common Market

A





               -3-

 countries if tariffs between these great trading blocs are reduced 
 in this way. The United States recognises that this could mean that 
 some of their own industries would go to the wall.

     We should also remember that any tariff reductions negotiated 
 between the United States and the Common Market countries would be
 fully available to all third countries such as Australia or New Zealand.

     The United States is making these moves because it believes 
 that the development of the Common Market will open the opportunity 
 for greater trade within the Western World with a consequent 
 strengthening of freedom and democracy.

     In the next few years we will learn whether she is right or
 wrong.

