<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth education funding for independent schools, parliamentary matters
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 19/12/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     RADIO TALK


     3 HA on Sunday 19 December 
     3 LK on Monday 20 December
     3 YB on Thursday 23 December



     Hello Ladies and Gentlemen:

       Last week the Prime Minister announced significantly 
•    inc eased f s for both hgovernment and independent schools.

       The main short-fall in expenditure for government 
     schools is in capital, and we can all point to difficulties 
     which have occurred in many schools throughout Australia.

       Up to the present time the Commonwealth has assisted by 
     providing funds for science laboratories and libraries in 
     all'schools. Now, for the first time, a specific su of 
     $20 million is being made available to the States foi primâ 
     and secondary school buildings and related facilities.

       Victoria's share of this sum is just over $5 million, 
•    which should add quite significantly to the $30 million which 
     Victoria spends each year on new school construction.

       I have regarded additional capital funds for government 
     schools as a high priority since I resumed this portfolio a 
     few months ago.

       These increased funds will be provided by an increase to 
     the interest-free capital grants which the Commonwealth makes 
     to the States as part of their total works and housing 
     programme. These capital grants are paid to the States to help 
     them finance non-productive capital works without incurring 
     any debt charges on the funds used. The grants are paid without 
     any matching conditions attached to them. The Commonwealth 
     does expect the States to maintain their own levels of expen- 
     diture on school construction. The funds made available in 
     these special grants can be spent up to 30 June next year.
                                ../2

                                                 2.

                This will give the States time to gear up to the additional 
                expenditure.


                      Since 1969 the Commonwealth has been supporting the running
               Lasts of independent schools, as do the States. The running    i
                costs of government schools have risen by 30 to 40 percent 
                and even more in the years since 1969. It now costs over 
                $300 a year to educate a child in a government primary school 
                and over $500 per head in a government secondary school.


                      The general financial assistance grants which the 
•               Commonwealth provides the States represent about one half 
                of the States' current budget expenditure and thus it could 
                be said that the Commonwealth supports approximately one half 
                of the current expenditure by the States on primary and secondary 
                schools.


                      the increased costs in independent schools have been 
                even greater than those in government schools because many 
                independent schools were paying salaries below those in 
                government schools and recent awards have made it necessary 
                to bring alaries up to the same levels.


 •                    arc t -.increases in the payments made by the States 
                to independent schools over the last two years, the government 
                believed that a number of independent schools would be facing 
                a critical situation from the beginning of the next school year 
                in the sense that a number of schools might be compelled to 
                close and, in other cases, a number of children refused 
                admission to independent schools because of lack of space. 
                This would not only harm the independent system, it would 
                also place greater pressure on the government schools in the 
                areas affected; and so the government has increased its 
                payments from $35 to $50 a head in primary schools and from 
                $50 to $68 a head in secondary schools. These increases will 
                cost just under$10 million in a full year.





                                                                                        ../3

                                      3.

                The government would like to see established a situation 
            in which the independent school system can continue to educate 
            that part of the school population which has traditionally 
            sought education in independent schools. Its policies are 
            designed to improve the quality of education in all schools.

                In this instance, after discussions with a number of 
           State Ministers, the Commonwealth believed that the greatest 
           shortage in the government sector was for additional capital 
           funds. These have been provided. We also believed the greatest 
           shortage in the independent sector was for additional funds 
•          for running costs and we have acted eats.




                A good deal of publicity was given to the fact that 
           Mr Justice Kerr was appointed to undertake a review of 
           parliamentary salaries. As many differing views were expressed 
           about his recommendations, the Prime Minister decided that 
           no action would be taken on salary increases during the 
           life of this Parliament.



•
                You will recall that in the last Session of Parliament, 
           there was a considerable outcry because the government used 
           what is known in Parliamentary terms as the guillotine, and 
           a large number of Bills were put through the Parliament in 
           a very short space of time.

                Even though these Bills were not contentious, even though 
           they were largely supported by the Opposition, there was a 
           widespread view that this ought not to happen.

                During the winter, the Prime Minister had appointed me 
           to a Government Members' Committee to make recommendations that 
           would make sure we avoided this situation for the future. 
           The Prime Minister had also asked that the Public Service and 
           Ministers look to proposals that would help in this situation. 
           Well, the last session ended quietly. Certainly we had some 
           reasonably late nights, but there was no great rush and there../4

                  4.

     was plenty of time for the debate of the important matters.

        The proposals that were made both from the Committee 
     I chaired and from other areas have, I think, proved 
     successful and this is shown in some figures.

        In the Spring Session, 72 Bills passed both Houses, 
     as against 65 in the Autumn Session. There were 450 sitting 
     hours, compared with 300 in the Autumn. A good deal more 
     work was accomplished with less fuss.

•       One of the interesting statistics during the session 
     was the presentation of nearly 600 petitions. In the
     Autumn. Session, there were only 137. Nearly 30,000 visitors 
     attended the House of Representatives in the public galleries 
     during the time the House was sitting.

        I hope that on future occasions the Parliament will be 
     able to get through its business as smoothly and as 
     effectively as it has.



        This is the final broadcast which I will be making 
     until Parliament resumes again in the New Year for the 
     Autumn Session. I wish you all a merry Christmas and 
     look forward to speaking to you again in 1972.

