<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool sales
Description: press statement
Date: 22/09/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PRESS STATEMENT:
                                                            September 22nd,1961
                      Malcolm Fraser said that as soon as he was told in confidence 
              about three weeks ago that buyers had been given instructions not to 
              attend wool sales in Portland he approached the Managing Director of 
              Goulburn Wool Export. Goulburn Wool Export is a buying Company, 
              organized and controlled by woolgrowers around Goulburn. It was 
              originally formed with grower capital for the sole purpose of breaking 
              the buyers' ban on the Goulburn sales. For this reason Goulburn 
              Wool Export traditionally does not place too much importance on a 
              directive issued by the Australian Council of Woolbuyers. In the 
              first sale after the ban on the Goulburn Centre, Goulburn Wool
              Export bought about 80% of the offering.  In doing this, this 
              grower controlled Company showed great courage because it had had 
              few overseas orders for wool. However, it was able to get orders
              for the wool it had purchased and to dispose of it. In more recent 
              times the Company has operated, not only at Goulburn but also at 
              Geelong and at Adelaide. He said he had been told it has been 
•             instrumental in lifting the average price of certain sales by as 
              much as 4d. or 5d.
                      Malcolm Fraser said his purpose in approaching Goulburn Wool 
              Export was to see if they would be in a position to go to the Portland 
              Sale on November 13th and to bid at the Portland sales. Even though 
              the Company was formed for the sole purpose of keeping the Goulburn 
              sale open it has continued operations. Malcolm Fraser said that 
              as he understands it some of the people concerned with the Company 
              felt that the wool Enquiry might reveal a permanent need for a 
              grower controlled company to operate in all selling Centres. This 
              would go some way towards ensuring a reasonable price for growers. 
              Goulburn Wool Export wished to remain alive in case the enquiry 
              recommended along these lines - in which case, the Company could 
              be readily expanded to operate in all Australian centres.
                      Mr. Bladwell of Goulburn Wool Export told Malcolm Fraser 
              that his Company would be pleased to operate at Portland, but it 
              would only be able to do so if it could get orders for the wool 
              before it went to the sale. They would not be in a position to 
              operate as they had at Goulburn without orders. The Goulburn 
              position was unique because in this instance the Company was gambling 
             with capital subscribed by growers around Goulburn. The Company 
             would not be able to gamble in the same way when operating in other 
             Centres as the specific purpose for which this Company was formed 
             was to break the buyers' ban at Goulburn.
                      However, Malcolm Fraser said he was told that if the people 
             organizing the sales at Portland were able to give Goulburn Wool 
             Export a reasonable forecast of the clips that were going to be 
             offered at the sales on November 13th they would immediately canvass 
             their overseas contacts to seek orders for this wool so that they
             would be able to bid at the auction.  If this could go ahead it 
             would be a most heartening move for woolgrowers and for this area

                                        2
            generally because growers could be confident that if Goulburn Wool 
            Export was operating on the market they would bid up to a fair price
            for the wool. This has always been their policy. If there has 
            been a tendency for wool to go too cheaply they have always kept 
            the bidding up to what they believe to be the proper market price 
            at the time.
                     Since speaking with Mr. Bladwell Malcolm Fraser said he 
            had put Goulburn Wool Export into contact with the Chairman of the 
            Woolgrowers' Co-operative and through them with Portland Wool 
            Brokers Ltd.   He said he very much hopes that the moves to attract 
            Goulburn Wool Export to bid in the Portland sale room would be 
            successful.




•











 i

