<!--start metadata-->
Title: Diesel tax
Description: radio talk
Date: 22/11/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                 DIESEL TAX.


    In the last few weeks the Government has boon making inquiries 
into the actual operation and distribution of the Diesel Tax and 
before making my reply I wanted to have firm information which I 
could give you. The question has now been decided and the Bill 
has been introduced into the House, the contents of which I hope 
you will find satisfactory.

    You will remember in a statement I sent out a short while 
ago I said that the tax was going to be distributed as nearly as 
possible on the basis of collections. For certain reasons, it 
was not actually possible to do this because there are certain 
refineries in some States which greatly weigh the taxes collected 
in those States in their favour. In other words, proportion of 
the tax is paid at the refinery. That is, of course, unrelated 
to road use because refineries distribute their fuel throughout 
the Commonwealth.

    It was then decided to examine the question of distributing 
the tax on the basis of motor registration. This was also found 
to-be impracticable; in fact, it would have operated to the 
detriment of Victoria, the reason being that many heavy diesel 
operators who operato almost exclusively on Victorian roads register 
for a f .;c of 30/— in Now South Wales.

    In actually deciding how the tax should be split up, the 
Government kept in mind the purpose of the tax, which was to mekc 
the heavy diesel operators pay e fair share of the maintenance of 
roads, something which they have not been doing in the past. It 
is only reasonable therefore to expect that the greatest expenditure 
from this diesel tax would be made in the areas whore the diesel 
operators operate most heavily.

    For the reasons I have given, the Government found that 
it could not find any hard and fast formula that would seem to 
give a fair distribution and, at the same time, fulfil the purpose 
of the tax. A formula based on collections and e formule based 
on registrations both proved to be inaccurate.

    The Government therefore has decided to distribute the tax 
on the basis of the following schedule which has been estimated 
as nearly as possible on the basis of road usage; in other words, 
the States that got the most use from heavy diesel trucks arc get;:_ng 
the most money from the tax:—
                              £
        New South Wales     800 ,000
        Victoria            700,000
        Queensland          500,000
        South Australia     325,000 
        Western Australia   475,000 
        Tasmania            150,000 
        Commonwealth purposes50,000

               TOTAL      £3 ,000 ,000
                           WOMINCIOCIROMICIIICOMMINCI
    In introducing the Bill, the Treasureremphasised two other 
points. Firstly, he underlined the fact that this was an interim 
measure designed purely to tide the situation over until there is 
a general review of the whole question of Commonwealth aid to roads 
when the present Petrol Tax formula comes up for renewal at the end 
of the next financial year, that is June 1959, and he also said that 
he did not went the basis of th, distribution of the Diesel T5x 
to be used in any way to anticipate the results of the review that 
would take place or to be used in any way to prejudice the findings 
of the Committee that will be examining the situation.



                               /Under

            -2-



  Under the Commonwealth legislation as it now exists, the 
States as a whole receive £37M. in aid for roods which is a con- 
siderable increase over the sums that were formerly made available. 
I know casts of road building have risen vary greatly but I think 
it is only fair to say that the money that has been made available 
to read building bodies has also incrcasad in a much greater 
proportion.

  I am glad to soc that you have considerably more funds t• 
spend in this financial year and I assume that the £700,000 that 
Victoria will get from this tax will also, or some of it at least, 
find its way to local municipalities and shires, although the 
Government has not placed any conditions on how it shall be 
distributed by the States to their various rond building bodies.

