<!--start metadata-->
Title: American beef
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 4/04/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                 L AMERICAN BEEF.

      t-t
         In the last few years the first purely American breed of beef cattle have 
   been instroduced into Australia. It is too early to say yet whether experiments 
   in this country with the Santa Getrudis cattle are going to be successful but the 
   story of the beginning and growth of the breeds apopularity in the two Âmerican 
   continents is an amazing one.

         The original animal on Ring Ranch, Texas, was the famed Longhorn,whioh was 
   noted for its tough constitution and for its tough beef. In the early 1880's the 
   herds were improved by the introduction of Shorthorn and Hereford blood till by 
   1916 the herds consisted of 25,000 pure bred Hereford and 25,000 Shorthorn. At 
   the same time calving percentages had dropped alarmingly and the cattle were be- 
   coming increasingly susceptible to heat and insects. The elder Robert Kl.eberg 
   began to contemplate a re-introduction of the Longhorn to put greater hardness
   into his herds.                                                      â   w ~ , ~ eieeiedi
         However initial experiments with the Brahma S. and the B. - H. cross showed 
   that under nearly all range conditions on King Ranch the crossbred calves and steers 
   age for age were heavier and fatter than thetellae blest progeny and at the same time 
   they could forage better under sparse conditions and they were not so susceptible 
   to heat and insects -2

         Therefore after 40 years effort to build up pure English herds they began an 
   extensive cross breeding programme using Brahmàr+Bulls and Hereford and Shorthorn 
   cows. Permanent cross-breeding is an awkward and costly procedure and from the first 
   the aim was to create a new breed that would combine the desirable qualities of both 
   the Brahma,wand the English Breeds and in this way increase beef production per
 Square mile. The $lebergs knew that success depended on finding a pepo$ent sire 
   pos:.essing these characteristics.

         To find the right Brahmandeaecattle for the creation of the new breed the 
   Klebergs even found it necessary to begin a stud of as pure Brahma cattle as could 
   be found.

         In 1920 the desired animal was found and christened Markey. His parents were 
   both part Shorthorn and part BrahmaN An extensive programme of lime and in breeding 
   then began. Mankeys children threw remarkably true to type and today every pure 
   bred S. G. is a direct descendant of Markey. In 1940 the breed was officially 
   recognised by the U. S. Department of Agriculture.
         Other cattlemen in Texas and the U. S.       had watched the experiments on K. R. 
   carefully. Soon the KLebergs were besieged         with requests for S. G. Bulls but at 
   first these had to be refused. Later a few         herd bulls were sold till now there is 
   an annual auction on K. R. In 1952 the top         bull brought 0'40,000. In 1951 an assoc- 
   iation of S. G. breeders was formed - there        were 166 members. Two years later the
   membership had doubled.

         The S. G. is the first new American breed created especially to suit harsh 
   grazing conditions. The growth in the popularity of the breed since its stabilis- 
   ation has been remarkable and has been accomplished only since 1920 when the 
   foundation sire was discovered.

         The KLebergs well recognised the good quality of British beef, indeed,over 40 
 /years they improved fine Hereford and Shorthorn herds but these cattle had suffered 
   considerably from flies, mosquitoes, screw worms and eartick and at temperatures 
   above 8O F. the British breeds run a high body temperature.

         These conditions do not exist in U.K. climate where the British breeds were
   developed. It is not surprising that to meet very different ~s vui.ee               grazing 
   conditions a new breed was required. The S. G. is the first real attempt to unite in 
   a new line - the hardiness of the Brahme.vwhich are used to harsh grazing, with the 
K good beef quality of the English breeds.

         S. G. have recently been brought into this country by people who feel that 
   conditions in parts of Australia resemble the ranges in Texas rather than the fields 
   of England. The two sales that have so far been held indicate a keen market for the I 
   S. G. fperiments have been begun here in crossing the S. G. with nearly every English 
   breed and comparisons are being made here under dry conditions and in areas that in 
   many ways resemble parts of `Hannon. It is thought that under nearly all conditions 
   the S. G. matures earlier than the British breed.

         At the same me they are being crossed with Illawarra shorthorns in an atte
   to produce good dairy caws that can at the same time give birth to an early ma 
   vealer. If these experiments bear out the expectations of the importers the result 
   will pi-317-675Y lasting benefit not only to the Australian beef and Dairy industries
  "but also to every Australian. $venture of this kind is but another phase n our 
   development of this country. It is an example of initiative and foresight that will
   help to make more work for more Australians.
                       kohe-S

              AMERICAN BFFF .

    Although the British beef animal produces high quality meat 
 there are some people who believe that the British breeds do not make 
 the best use of Australian conditions. Sam Hordern, Peter Baillieu and 
 Sir Rupert Clarke have combined with Robert Kleberg, Director of King 
 Ranch, Texas, to import Santa Getrudi cattle. It is one hundred years 
 since the breed was established from crosses between shorthorn and 
 brahmin, in fact they are 5/8 shorthorn and 3/8 brabmin. Now they are 
 to be found throughout both the American Continents. From the
 shorthorn they have inherited fine quality beef and quietness in 
 handling, they have the tick resistance of the brahmin. The cross has 
 produced a beast that matures early, that forages well, that can travel 
 great distances to water and which is less affected by heat than most 
 animals. The cattle should be a deep red and have a small hump
 inherited from the brahmin. They kill out heavier than the pure bred 
 English breeds. The truth of these claims is born out by the breed's 
 growing popularity in the Americas and Robert Kleberg believes they have 
 a great future in Australia. Two hundred heifers he sent here are the 
 first females ever to leave King Ranch, Texas.
    King Ranch, Australia, has established its headquarters at 
Risdon, Warwick, Queensland. From this property one can buy pure bred 
 Santa Getrudi bulls at a yearly sale. There have already been two 
 successfull sales of stud bulls, averaging over one thousand guineas. 
People with faith in the breed can establish their own herds by recrossing 
with shorthorn. In America crosses with Aberdeen Angus and Herefords 
have also been very successful in securing early maturing beef. When 
Robert Kleberg was visiting Australia he saw our dual purpose Illawarra 
shorthorns for the first time. This breed is unknown in America but 
he thought a Santa Getrudas-Illawarra cross would produce a good dairy 
animal capable of rearing an excellent early maturing vealer. This 
could be a significant factor in increasing the prosperity of our
dairy industry considering the number of bull calves that at present go 
to the scrap heap. Experiments in this cross have been begun in
New South Wales. In the recent sales at Risdon most of the buyers were

                2
from Queensland and the bulls are being crossed with shorthorn and 
hereford cows. Crosses being carried out by the importers with cows 
of nearly every breed give promise of good results.
   At the present moment it is too early to give positive results 
or guarantees about the future of the breed in Australia but cattle 
men must admit that the initial experiments open up avenues for serious 
thought. We have o*ly to look at the tick areas of Australia and to 
think that cattle in these areas have to be dipped on an average once 
in every six weeks. With tick resistent cattle over a period of years 
it would be possible to cut down the work entailed in this gigantic 
task. If experiments do prove that the Santa Getrudas do mature, under 
nearly all conditions, a year earlier than the English breeds, than 
they undoubtedly have a great future in Australia for the output of 
each property would be increased by roughly one fourth.
   Since the prosperity of this country rests very largely upon 
our primary exports initiative of the kind that led to the importation 
of the Santa Getrudas must surely be encouraged. The people behind 
the breed in Australia well know the good quality of British beef but 
at the same time they feel that the best use is not being made of our 
natural resources. If Australia is to play its true role in the world 
the beef industry must play its part by increasing both the quantity 
and quality of its product... Although our farmers have achieved very 
much in the last few years our land is capable of greater development 
in future decades. Ventures that promise us all greater prosperity 
must be encouraged and we must realise such things are only possible 
under sound governments embodying the principles of freedom.

