<!--start metadata-->
Title: ANZAC commemorative Medallion
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 20/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


DRAFT


Covering note to all Editors with attached press statement


Dear

    I am enclosing a copy of the following press 
statement. I would welcome any publicity you could give 
it as it would certainly help in getting these applications 
processed in the shortest space of time.
               Yours sincerely,

..



   PRESS STATEMENT



   MALCOLM FRASER     20 MARCH, 1967



        Malcolm Fraser said to-day that the Army had been 

   given the job of issuing the Anzac Commemorative Medallion 

   and Lapel Badge to surviving Gallipoli veterans and the 

   Anzac Medallion to the next-of-kin.



        He said that he hoped that issues would commence 

   shortly and that it would be possible to meet early applications 

   before Anzac Day. However, to make this possible it will be 

   necessary for applications to be made to the Army as soon as 

   possible and the applications should contain sufficient 

   information to determine the applicant's entitlement.



        Anzac veterans should write to - 

           The Officer-in-Charge,
           Central Army Records Office,
           "A" Block,
           Albert Park Barracks, 
           MELBOURNE, VICTORIA

   or directly to Mr. Malcolm Fraser at Parliament House,

   Canberra. Malcolm Fraser said he would welcome personal 

   advice of any application so he could see they were processed 

   as quickly as possible.



        Applications should include full name, regimental 

   number, unit in which the applicant served in Gallipoli and 

   the present private address of the applicant.



        Mr. Fraser also said that he has written to all 

   local sub-branches of the R.S.L. seeking their co-operation.

