<!--start metadata-->
Title: Primary industry
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 10/03/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                          PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 
                                                          HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES


FOR I11T-I'ORi:LTIC: OF: PRESS                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12~ ;.RGO:. Sunday,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6. O0p. m. 10 Harch 1974. 


                             J1J::IV MEAT,                           Ì'.   _                  _      .=-L: 2O1Z 7iií1i0_: — 10                                                                               LrJJ031                  197 ..          L,


The Parliament is back at work. During the recess a number of 
Liberal Party Co i ttees have been wor= in quite intensively 
to -Qrepare policy which will cover important areas of activity 
in Australia.

Tony Street, as Liberal Spckesnan for Primary Industry and as 
Chairman of the Party Co mi ttees on Primary Industry matters, 
has put to the Party a sensible but far reaching rural policy.

           have alreaw - unde press statements about this and if there 
are any who would like a copy of the policy in its full detail 
then I would be happy to send it to them.

But briefly our policies are based on the belief that rural 
communities and people Who live in he great cities are 
dependant, on each other. We reject the concept of competition 
between ton and country and believe that if ustralia is to be 
truly prosperous then all Australia must be prosperous.

We believe that policies properly devised to encourage rural 
industries will have great advantage for people who live in Cho 
great cities of Australia.

For example, a few years ago when rural industries were depressed 
through low prices and drought it wasn't only the farmers who 
suffered but it was also the people in coup try towns and in the 
cities.

Factories in the cities went out of business because of the 
depression in the countryside.

                2.

Our policies are designed to help farmers overcome the peaks and 
troughs in primary industry activity, to encourage lone; term 
Planning so that the farmers future and the community's future 
can be more predictable.

On a return to office we have decided quite firmly to establish a 
sepnrate rural bank. We would hope that existing trading banks 
and the Commonwealth trading bank, and stock firms where it is 
appropriate, would join in the new institution so that the 
resources hey now invest in this area would continue to be 
directed to rural objectives.

However, if they are unwilling to join in this venture our decision 
is firm, we will establish a rural bank to provide loans up to 
30 years for Purchase of land and to provide loans from 5 to 10 
years for the purchase of, plant equipment and breeding stock at 
bank interest rates.

We believe it quite wrong that producers equipment should have to 
be bought on hire. purchase terms.

As an alternative to the income averaging proposals we would establish 
a farm income reserve fund which would provide an opportunity for 
farmers to even out the peaks and troughs in their own income.

 have a detailed statement on this fund which can be sent to anyone 
who is interested and 1 believe that it is one of the more useful 
and imaginative proposals to be made to assist rural industries.

In Government we will support the continuation of rural reconstruction.

We will support the establishment of a maximum security laboratory 
and quarantine station to provide maximum protection for Australia's 
primary industries against imported diseases and at the same time 
encourage the introduction of new blood.

We will press firmly forward with a national approach to eradicate 
diseases and insect Pests.

                                                      â•

Australia is one of the most drouht-prone c un ."-Jes in the 
world with wide seasonal variations.

On return to Government we will provide appropriate incentives 
2or water and soil conservation and fodder storage to encourage 
far-ers to drought proof themselves in thir own and in the 
national interest.

- e will also discuss with the States the establishment of a
Oommonwealth/3tate Lgèncy to entoura_ e most effective use of 
research and extension funds. Our purpose would be to safeguard 
the independent decision making of the States in the use of funds 
available to them, to maximise the dissemination of information 
between extension and research officers and to advise the States 
and the Commonwealth on expenditure of research and extension funds.

Universities and Mate Departments would make their own final 
judgment in the funds that would be available to them.

This proposal has been discussed_ with a wide variety of research 
  nd extension officers.

I believe this proposal will be of great advantage to the farming 
community and will :greatly assist extension and research officers 
in their work. I would hope it world lead to a cuicker solution 
to problems that appear on farms and to even better advice than is 
now available.

Finally, let me say that the Liberal Party firmly believes that 
the best farm is the efficiently managed owner operated farm as 
the basic unit for Australian agriculture.

We are determined that lack of capital on realistic terms and 
excessive taxation will not be allowed to weaken the ability 
of such farms to produce effectively.

