<!--start metadata-->
Title: Overseas investment in Australia
Description: Press release
Date: 19/03/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS RELEASE
By Mr Malcolm Fraser, Minister for Education and Science
and Member for Wannon

OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA

       Australia continues to receive the flow of 
needed overseas capital investment which helps in the gigantic
task of harnessing the country's natural resources.
       The inflow of these funds has proved to be a
vital element in assisting our development to continue at the
remarkable pace we have seen for many years.
       Our population of about 12 million occupies
a country one—third as large again as all Europe.
       Large amounts of capital must be found to
develop our far—flung resources.
       We cannot find all this capital ourselves from
internal sources. So we need investment funds coming from 
other countries — particularly those funds that will help in
the balanced development of Australian resources.
       These investment funds from abroad provide a
vital stimulus to the launching of new developments.
       Much goes into opening up new iron ore fields
in the northwest, in developing our rich bauxite and other
mineral deposits.
       The growth of the manufacturing sector has been
assisted by foreign investment.
       Industries such as motor vehicles, chemicals,
oil refining and oil exploration have been expanded as a result
of these funds.
       Australians benefit from the resultant technical

          -2—

know—how, new technological skills, modern production methods
and management practices accompanying investment funds from abroad.
        Thousands of Australians owe their jobs to the
work created by the investment of foreign capital in ventures
here.
        Recently, foreign investment has been a live
issue in the press and other media, and the Opposition sought
in Parliament to criticise the Government over some aspects
of it.
        The Opposition's move failed to produce any
single line of attack.
        Indeed, the Labor Party's 'shadow treasurer'
took it on himself to praise the results of foreign investment
here.
        He quoted approvingly from a Treasury Bulletin
which said overseas investment here had enabled Australians
to enjoy higher living standards.
        Noone denies that inflow of large funds ....
which ran into a total of $857 million in 1967-68 ... would be
without problems.
        The Government recognises this, and has kept
a close watch on the areas where they have developed.
        We have made it clear for a long time that the
Government is keen that overseas firms establishing enterprises
in Australia should welcome Australians into those enterprises.
        In the debate in Parliament, the Prime Minister
pointed out that more equity participation was being offered to
Australians than in the past.
        The Government was making an intensive study
to see whether more Australian equity could be offered, he said.

