<!--start metadata-->
Title: Scientific cooperation between United States and Australia
Description: radio talk
Date: c1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                          ~a    5Lp, ~o .


RADIO TALK BY MR MALCOLM FRASER, MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
MEMBER FOR WANNON


     In Canberra this week a five year agreement providing for the expansion 
of scientific co-operation between Australia and the United States was 
formally signed. As Minister for Education and Science I signed on behalf 
of the Government and the U.S. signatory was Dr Donald F. Hornig, Special 
Assistant to the U.S. President for Science and Technology, who led a 
high ranking scientific mission to Australia.

     Leading up to this agreement was an intensive round of discussions over 
a wide area of the sciences between the visiting Americans and top level 
Australians. The U.S. team came to Australia as a result of a decision by 
President Johnson and the Prime Minister, Mr Gorton, during Mr Gorton's 
U.S. visit last May.

     The agreement states the intention of both countries to stimulate and
strengthen co-operative scientific efforts. It seeks increased avenues
for scientists and engineers to engage in joint research projects and to
exchange information, as well as to open the way for increased exchanges
of scientists. This interesting development in no way reflects on the
current state of Australian-American scientific co-operation. There has
been a good deal of it. There have been continuing contacts between
individuals and institutions. One such field is astronomy where in recent
years the results of collaboration have been demonstrated in the discoveries
made by the giant radio-telescope at Parkes (New South Wales) and the development
of them by optical-astronomy interpretation in institutes in the United States.
And there are other fields in which an exchange of scientific results has
proved rewarding for both countries.

     Under the new agreement, agencies have been appointed to act as 
co-ordinators of joint activities and as liaison avenues - in Australia 
it is my own Department of Education and Science; in the United States, 
the National Science Foundation.

     A wide range of sciences and their application to the problems of both 
countries are embraced in the desire for further co-operation. The agricultural 
sciences, for instance, receive detailed mention in the agreement. And so we 
look forward to further worthwhile co-operative effort in the problems of arid 
and semi-arid zones, which take up about three quarters of the Australian 
continent.

     These problems deal with our rangelands, where because of the harsh climate 
the native vegetation is in delicate balance with the environment. These 
rangelands are, however, of critical importance to us because they carry 
about one-third of Australia's sheep and cattle and earn export income 
exceeding $400 million a year. And the messages of Export Week have left 
us in no two minds about the importance of that sort of income. The 
Americans have been investigating the problems of their rangelands for a 
long time, and now C.S.I.R.O. has established a program devoted to the 
preservation of these areas to ensure their continued production.

     The Australian American scientific agreement covers the evaluation of 
soil and land potential. It covers biological methods of controlling crop 
and animal pests - methods which seek to replace use of pesticides which 
have harmful side effects to man and his environment. It seeks to provide 
for further co-operation in animal nutrition with special reference to trace 
elements - a field in which Australian science has made major advances, and 
where close co-operation already exists.

4
                     —2—


     The agreement points to hopes for exchange of experts or information, 
   or for joint projects, over many fields. It is intended to exchange 
   information on the secrets of the ocean; on the study of the weather. 
   There is a desire to speed the exchange of data on earthquakes and the 
   ocean tides; to collaborate on the investigation of underground water 
   supplies; on the physiology of animals and plants and diseases affecting 
   them. A fascinating field of study where collaborative prospects exist is 
   in the techniques of remote sensing of earth resources from aircraft, and 
   eventually from satellites. By this means what is now painstaking and 
   drawn—out work on the ground may become an easy, automatic task for 
   electronic eyes and sophisticated instruments in space.

     The agreement to us holds the promise of substantial benefits in the 
   future. I know that Dr Hornig and members of his team were delighted 
   with it.

     Some correspondents have written to Federal Ministers expressing concern 
   about lamb prices, and urging Government action against imports of the small 
   quantities of New Zealand lamb into this country. While home consumption 
   of lamb in the first six months of 1968 was 72 million carcasses, imports 
   from New Zealand totalled 37,000 carcasses — less than one half per cent 
   share of the market. It is true that prices have fallen. But it is 
   interesting to take a look at what has been happening in the numbers of 
   lambs coming onto the market. Departmental figures show that a fall in 
   price has almost invariably followed the pattern of heavily increased 
   yardings.
     This is seen quite starkly in official departmental figures covering 
   the first eight months of the year. In this period total yardings in 
   Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Adelaide were up nearly 15% on the same 
   period for 1967. But the impact of this increased number on the prices 
   the producers expect to achieve may have been emphasised by the much 
   greater yardings in particulPr months of this year as compared to last 
   year. For instance, in Sydney yardings increased from just over 40,000 
   in August 1967 to more than 80,000 in August this year; and in Melbourne 
   yardings rose from over 114,000 in August 1967 to more than 182,000 
   in August this year. A comparison of the latest monthly prices shows 
   that in Brisbane price per lb. dressed weight fell from 22.6 cents in 
   September 1967 to 15.3 cents in September this year. Sydney prices 
   dropped from 24.4 cents in September 1967 to 16.3 cents last month. 
   Melbourne prices declined from 22 cents to 13.7 cents; and in Adelaide 
   the fall was from 22.3 cents to 14.8 cents.

     The question of imports from New Zealand and their impact on the 
   Australian market cannot now be merely looked upon as a domestic issue 
   between Australia and New Zealand. The United States takes the great 
   bulk of Australia's meat exports. The U.S. has a global quota of about 
   470,000 tons, and wP supply nearly half of that. There are meat interests 
   in the U.S. who argue against any imports at all. If we were to completely 
   prohibit the importation of New Zealand meat we would be giving a powerful 
   argument to the protective interests in the U.S.

     In recent times a committee has been established representative of 
   producers to maintain a constant liaison with the Department of Trade and 
   Industry. And at the same time there are safeguards in the Australia—New 
   Zealand Free Trade Agreement which enable a country to take action if it can 
   be demonstrated that imports are harming that industry. So while the govern- 
   ment will be doing everything it can to protect the interests of local 
   producers we must at the same time have in mind the effects that our actions 
   could have on Australia's overseas markets.

