<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary debates, farmers, Department of Labour, Income Maintenance Scheme
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 8/12/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                        EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m.
ELECTORAL STATEMENT                             8th December, 1974.
               THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER
                             RADIO TALK

Last week the House of Representatives ended its work for 1974. The 
Senate will be sitting for one further week to deal with matters that 
had to be referred from the House of Representatives.

Parliamentary Debates
I do not really believe that it was a particarly notable year. A 
good deal of work was done it is true but the quality of the debates 
was not as good as I believe they ought to have been and largely 
because many significant policy statements from the Government were 
made outside the Parliament, either in press conferences or just by 
general issue to the public. Major statements ought to be made in 
the Parliament. When the Prime Minister returns from overseas he 
should report in reasonable detail through the Parliament to the 
people of Australia and other Ministers should follow the same prac- 
tice.

This has not'been done under this Government and as a result the sig- 
nificant debates that used to take place in the Parliament tended to 
be put aside.

The Prime Minister and Farmers

The Prime Minister appeared on "Four Corners" recently and in that 
interview he spoke about Government support (and that really ought 
to be in inverted commas) for rural industries. The Prime Minister 
said, "the fact is there is a better hope now for people who live 
in the country and more of them live in country towns than ever before."

The Prime Minister is really only saying in another way "you have 
never had it so good". We all remember that he said that earlier in 
the year at a meeting in Gippsland. It was not particularly well 
received. His language on this occasion was more moderate but he 
does not understand that beef prices have been at rock bottom, he
does not understand that wool and sheep prices are very much lower 
than they have been.

Primary producers not only have to put up with vastly reduced returns - 
they also have to put up with increased costs that have risen much 
more than the general cost of living because the superphosphate sub- 
sidy has been removed. Other matters which have occurred mean that 
the costs of farming have gone up much more than the general level 
of costs.

I do not think the Prime Minister will every understand about life

                                                         ../2

                              2.
on the land. It is alien to him and hedoes not seem to have a feeling 
for the problems and difficulties of people who live outside the great 
cities.

No alibi for Mr Whitlam

The Prime Minister has been seeking to persuade people that the ec- 
onomic problems of this Government are caused by overseas factors. 
This is a defeatist view because even if there were problerrscaused 
from overseas a Government that really knew what it was about would 
say "we can overcome that, we can work together and no matter what 
happens overseas we are going to be able to preserve the kind of 
Australia that we would all want."

But he does not say that. He says that inflation is caused by over- 
seas events, that unemployment is worse overseas than it is in Aust- 
ralia. Because it is bad there, it is bad here in addition. It is 
a weak excuse. It is not even an accurate excuse because as I have 
said before if we had suffered from the increase in oil prices that 
have occurred overseas inflation would already have been over 30%. 
In addition to that the wage claims that were supported by this Gov- 
ernment cannot be blamed on the government overseas or on trade 
unions overseas.

The tariff cuts leading to unemployment can only be blamed on the 
present Government. The general extravagences of the Government, 
whether it is in hiring a Qantas jet for the Prime Minister when he 
could easily go on a commercial jet and set an example of restraint 
under present circumstances, or whether it is in the general expend- 
iture plans of this Government, are matters which cannot be blamed 
on the people overseas. They are the responsibility of the Prime 
Minister. It is within his power to alter that if he wanted it. 
What has happened in Australia so far is homegrown. Our difficulties, 
the level of unemployment are home grown and home caused. That is 
the tragedy of it all.

This has been recognised by other Ministers. Certainly Frank Crean 
who is shortly to be deposed as Treasurer indicated that the main 
inflationary elements in Australia were Australian caused. That 
would seem to blow out the Prime Minister's alibi.

Call for an enquiry into administration in the Department of Lâbour

We need a public enquiry into all aspects of the administration of 
the various plans that the Minister for Labour has introduced in
recent times. An enquiry into the National Employment and Training 
Scheme which is full of anomalies, an enquiry into the resources 
needed by the Department of Labour - needed to deal expeditiously 
and quickly with people who are experiencing hardship under the 
present circumstances, under the present conditions of rising un- 
employment.
                            ..13

                                               3.
The Minister for Labour is getting into a real muddle in the admin- 
istration of his Department. It is a Department geared significantly 
to a full employment situation where the strain on local Commonwealth 
Employment Services and officers is not all that great. Now the 
Department is just not equal to deal with the additional obligations 
put upon them.

It is not only the fact that there are more - and a growing number - 
of unemployed applying for help. There is also the National Re- 
training scheme. In that area people who are unemployed are having 
to wait a considerable time. People who are in a job and who want 
to be re-trained for one reason or another would have to wait a 
matter of months.

The Minister indicated the other day that 529 additional officers are 
being recruited. I don't know why they have not been recruiting more 
over the course of this year as unemployment has grown. The Minister 
has known full well for a long while that there would be additional 
responsibilities on his Department as a result of the re-training
scheme. It is only in recent times according to an answer he gave 
on the 4th December in Parliament that they have been seeking addit- 
ional officers for the Department of Labour.

$200 a week for not working

Another admission was made by the Minister during the same question 
time when he said that people could be paid by this Government $200 
a week not to work.

There is a scheme called the Income Maintenance Scheme. If a person 
is put out of work as a result of the Government's earlier tariff 
cuts, he would then receive for six months the average weekly earnings 
that he has received over the previous six months. If he has been 
earning $200 a week with overtime that might have been available 
then that is what he gets for the next six months. The Minister ad- 
mitted that many people in these circumstances would be getting more 
than those who were left in employment because with the down turn in 
activity overtime is now much less. In many areas it has been cut 
out. Therefore in a number of industries people who were retrenched 
from a particular factory are being paid more for six months to do 
nothing than people who are still working in that particular factory.

In some industries there is even now a shortage of employees because 
why would a person go to work for a wage which because of no overtime is 
now less than the Government's six months paid holiday.

I have spoken earlier of the anomalies under the NEAT scheme but let 
me mention just one or two.

A person on a widows' pension with nothing but the pension going onto
                                              ../3

                               4.

the re-training scheme would loose her widows' pension and her
pension rights. Somebody with $10,000 a year would be able to go 
along and get the re-training allowance for the same course. There 
is no justice or equity in these particular matters.

In addition to this a single person gets the same allowance as a 
married person with family obligations. The allowance I believe ought 
to be adjusted to meet the needs of individuals. That would better 
suit families and at the same time be much more economical for the 
tax payer. I agree with and I support many of the objectives of the 
re-training programmes but the administration is abysmal. It is 
shockingly expensive and the tax payer is going to have to carry an 
unreal financial burden as the result.

