<!--start metadata-->
Title: Israel, Middle East, Yom Kippur War
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 21/10/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA                                  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
41'   ~ ~ í ~~ ~~HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES                                 CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 
                                                                          TEL 721211





    FOR INFORMATION OF PRESS GALLERY                          EMBARGO: 7.30 p.m. 
                                                              Sunday, 21 October.


           ELECTORAL STATEMENT BY THE HON. T°IALCOLN FRASER, N. P. , 
           MEMBER FOR WANNON - SUNDAY, 21 OCTOBER, 1973. 



          In the last week or so there has been some tragic news

    from the Middle East.              I think some of us might have 

    expected that the hostilities would be resumed between

    Israel and the Arab powers.                 There had been a build-up of

    armaments.         The Russians had trained and re-armed many of

    the Arab nations.            I believe that Russian activities in 

    withdrawing from Egypt and, as I understand it, from some 

    other Arab nations shortly before hostilities began, was a 

    move merely to allow the Russians to appear to be uninvolved 

    in what had happened, but I am suspicious of their ultimate 

    motives.


          I believe that most Australians will be sympathetic to the

    cause of Israel.            The Jewish people have been pilloried 

    around the world. They have suffered more hardship than any 

    other group that can be named, and the onP chance of a home, 

    their one chance of a national identity was to be allowed to

    survive in Israel.            They know what they are up against.

    They also know that this is probably the only chance that our world 

    will give them for an independent existence. As a result of this

    they are tough, they are determined to survive.                         As their

    Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda Heir, said;"They must fight or die." 

    If they give in to the forces against them it means the

    destruction of Israel.


          But the tragic part of what has happened is that now we have 

    the Soviet Union pouring additicnal .rms into the Arab powers 

    and this has compelled the United States to re-supply Israel

    so that they can continue to defend themselves.                         What the outcome

    of this conflict might be I do not know.                      But I have always 

    believed and still believe that one of the cardinal Russian 

    objectives in this area is to establish the circumstances.

    in which the Suez Canal will be re-opened to the Russian Navy

                          2.

and once that occurres the'Russian Navy will dominate the 
Indian Ocean.
    What Australians need to understand and need to realise 
is that many people had thought that life in the Middle East 
had settled down. Many people had thought because of the 
alleged detente between the Soviet Union and the United States 
that there would not be a further outbreak of hostilities in 
the Middle East. What has happened in the Middle East shows 
how fragile peace can be, and it is not only in the Middle East
that there is a prospect of serious disturbance. Those who 
say that Australia is entering a decade of serenity, those who 
say that the world is a more peaceful place as a result of the 
Soviet Union/United States detente, have been proved, I believe,
to be quite and categorically wrong.  Unfortunately the world
is not a safe place.  Australia can be thankful that this 
particular disturbance is taking place a considerable distance 
from our own shores, but the tumultuous world in south East Asia 
is far from settled and far from secure, and could easily 
become a scene of great power rivalry, particularly between 
Russia and China, and Japan could also be involved. Under 
those circumstances the alleged security that Australia is 
meant to have, according to the Government, for the next 15 
years could very quickly be shattered.
    We must all hope that the hostilities in the Middle East 
are ended, that reason will prevail, that all countries will 
be allowed to work out their own path, pursue their own
independence without interference from neighbours. But in the 
present state of hostilities it would seem that it will take 
a very long while to achieve that.


    The Â.L.P. looks to be in difficulties, or perhaps it 
would be more true to say that Bob Hawke seems to be in some 
difficulty because he is not only President of the Australian 
Council of Trade Unions but also the Federal President of the 
A.L.P., and one would therefore have thought that as Federal 
President of the A.L.P. Mr. Hawke ought to support the Prime 
Minister and the Labor Government in trying to get passage of
two referendums - one to give the Federal Govern   Pnmr)lete

                         3.

over all prices, and two to give the Federal Government complete 
power over all incomes.
    Mr. Hawke, as we all now know, has decided to prefer his 
A.C.T.U. hat to his A.I.P. hat, and he has made it quite plain 
that the A.C.T.U. is going to campaign very strongly indeed 
against the incomes power being given to the Federal Government 
and that means he will be campaigning against the Prime Minister.
    It is an odd situation when you can have political 
arrangements which enable the Federal President of a political 
party to campaign against the Prime Minister who comes from the
same political party. But 1 do not really think that this 
tangled skein has been properly unravelled up to this point 
because the Prime Minister himself said that there was very 
considerable legal opinion which believedpower over prices would
include a power over wages, because wages can be regarded as the
price of labour.
    Now if Mr. Whitlam is right in having that view, then it is 
highly probable that all those who support or who voted for 
price control power being given to the Federal Government, would 
also in fact be giving the Federal Government complete control 
over wages in addition, and it is this, of course, which the 
A.C.T.U. oppose bitterly, strongly and vehemently, and if
there is even a legal doubt in this area concerning this
matter then in logic     the          ought to oppose both 
branches of the referendum and not just one, because if they 
support power over prices there is a very real probability 
that at the same time they will be giving the Prime Minister
power over wages in addition. It is going to be hard to tell 
what happens as a result of these two referendums. My personal 
view is that both referendums will be lost and they will be 
lost in large measure because of the clash within the L.L.P. 
on the issue.

