<!--start metadata-->
Title: Post Office, dairy industry survey, China and the United Nations,
Description: Radio talk
Date: 22/04/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                   THURSDAY 22ND APRIL 1971 
                                                   SUNDAY 25th APRIL 1971


                  TEXT OF RADIO TALK BY MR. MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON


                              Today I want to talk about the Post Office, 
                  the Dairy Industry Survey and Continental China.
                  The Post Office

                              Last week I opened a new and renovated Post 
                  Office for Warrnambool. Few people realise that the 
                  Postmaster—General's Department is bigger than B.H.P., 
~                 General Motors Hoidens, British Tobacco, Coles and Myers 
                 put together. Its assets are just short of $2,000 million
                 and it has a staff of over 100,000. Its capital expenditure 
                 has gone up from about $100 million to about $400 million in 
                 ten years, and at the same time its running costs have gone 
                 from $200 million to $600 million. It is a vast enterprise 
                 and its activities affect our lives in many different ways.
                             Direct Payments from the Treasury Tax Payers'
                 Funds to the Post Office have increased from $100 to $230 million 
                 over ten years, and that is the end of the figures.

                             There is always objection to increases in Post 
                 Office charges, but as costs go up the Post Office either has 
                 to reduce its services, reduce its rate of capital expansion, 
                 charge higher prices for its services, or get more money from 
                 Treasury Tax Payer Funds. The Government has over the years tried 
                 to strike a balance between increases in charges and payments from 
                 the tax payer. It just boils down to the fact that if you want 
                 the service, or an improved service, you have to pay for it. 
                 I think we would generally agree that telephone services, which 
                 are very expensive to provide, have improved greatly over the last 
                 ten or fifteen years. For example, in this electorate the number 
                 of automatic exchanges has gone up from 63 to 93 and 
                 the number of subscribers on automatic service have more than 
                 doubled, but I know there is still quite a way to go.

                  2.

        The Dairy Industry Survey
              The Minister for Primary Industry announced 
        recently that the Bureau of Agricultural Economics is to 
        conduct an economic survey into the dairy industry, 
        covering the three years ending 1969/70.

              The last survey covered the early part of the 
        1960ís, and many changes have occurred in the industry since 
        then - in techniques of production and in the market situation 
        for dairy products.

              The present dairy industry stabilisation 
•       arrangements expire in June of next year, and the results 
        of the Survey would help the Government and the industry 
        in considering future arrangements after that time.

              The survey will cover all states, starting in
        Victoria.
              Mr. Sinclair said that he hoped there would be 
        full co-operation from dairy farmers, and that this would be 
        essential if the Survey was to be successful.

              The Australian Dairy Industry Council and the 
        Australian Dairy Farmers Federation had pledged their full 
        support for the Survey.

        China and the United Nations

             There has been a great deal of discussion over
        the last two or three weeks, and we have had reports of a successful 
        tour by a United States "ping pong" team to China, and an Australian 
        team is also visiting Continental China for tho first time in many 
        years.

             The Prime Minister has announced that the Government

•
                                 3.

          is considering relaxation of trade restrictions, and it has been 
         made plain that there is hope for an increase in trade and 
          co—lateral activities of different kinds.

                    A lot of this has got mixed up with wheat and possible 
         future sales by the Australian Wheat Board, which has traditionally 
         been the authority for the negotiation of international sales.

                    I am sure it is the general objective of the Board 
         to be left free to conduct its operations without political
         interference. This is the way it should be.

                    People have sought to make a good deal of the fact 
         that Continental China has not bought much wheat from us recently. 
         The information available to me indicates that their own crops had 
         increased greatly, and that their requirements for wheat were down.. 
         In addition to that, the Chinese used to export rice and import 
         wheat, but I am advised that their rice markets overseas have fallen, 
         and thus some of their internal consumption might convert from wheat 
         to rice, again reducing the demand for overseas wheat.

                    Out of all this came an offer by Dr. Rex Patterson 
         to visit Peking for the Opposition to discuss the wheat trade. 
         This is something for which the Wheat Board is itself responsible. 
         I don't think political intervention of this kind will really help.

                    One of the intriguing things about this situation is 
         that the Australian Broadcasting Commission requested that Mr. John 
         Penlington be able to go to Continental China so that "Four Corners" 
         could produce a film concerning China.

                   The A.B.C. was contacted by Mr. Edward Hill, the 
         Secretary of the Communist Party of Australia, and Mr. Hill said that 
         he had been asked by the Chinese authorities to handle the matter.
                   Mr. Hill wished to meet MIr. Penlington to form some 
         impression of him before he would give his approval. Mr. Hill said


                                             ....I4

       •
                                  4.

              that unless this course was accepted, the application would 
             not be given any further consideration.

                      Thus, the A.P.C., which wishes to send somebody 
             to Continental China, was refused unless its personnel were 
             vetted by a leading member of the Australian Communist Party.

             business.At the very least, it is an odd way of doing


 i
                            ....o0o 











so

