<!--start metadata-->
Title: World recession
Description: Electorate talks
Date: 15/08/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


NO

                   EMBARGO: 5:00PM


             ~~~~>}}'~< <É<~



         PRIME MINISTER


 FOR MEDIA        SUNDAY, AUGUST 15 1982


             ELECTORATE TALK


 A groundswell of opinion is building up throughout the community 
 that Australians need to work together in the face of world 
 recession which is now hitting Australia hard. Industry and 
 trade unions as well as governments are recognising that the 
 path of co-operation and moderation is the best way to achieve 
 our common objectives as a nation, the best way to help insulate 
 all Australians from the impact of world recession, and the 
 best way to be ready to take advantage of world economic 
 recovery when it finally comes.

 The growing recognition that we need to co-operate and work 
 together as one people is a hopeful development indeed. It 
 provides a foundation for increasing moderation in wage demands, 
 for restoring Australia's ability to compete in overseas markets, 
 for improving our reputation as a reliable supplier, and it will 
 help in the continuing fight against inflation.

 The signs of a greater willingness to work together can be seen 
 in several areas. There has been a substantial fall in the 
 number of working days lost through strikes and industrial 
 disputes. In the three months to May 1981, 640,000 days were 
 lost in industrial disputes; in the three months to May of 
 this year, 380,000 working days were lost- a fall of about 
 forty per cent against last year.

 Another recent sign of willingness to work together is the 
 co-operation between unions, management and governments, based 
 on the Crawford Report to make shipping flow more smoothly 
 through our ports. Governments, both State and Federal, have 
 also been getting together with the coal industry to find 
 ways out of the very great difficulties which have plagued 
 this major export industry-and which were at the same time 
 jeopardising vital future contracts, particularly in Asia, 
 because supply has been too unreliable.

 The recent meeting between the CAI, the ACTU and the Commonwealth 
 to analyse our economic problems and co see to what extent there 
 is a common understanding about them, is a further important 
 example of how we have begun to work together. At that meeting, 
 all parties agreed that Australia was facing serious economic 
 problems, and with varying emphasis, there was agreement that 
 there is a link between excessive wage increases and a loss 
 of jobs.

                      - 2 -





In the last few days, the Government has accepted salary
recommendations well below the current inflation rate for
Parliamentarians and senior public servants, and I have been
pleased to note that the Academic Salaries Tribunal has also
recommended a salary increase substantially below the rate
of inflation. An important example to the community has been
set by these actions and I have written to a number of companies,
to State Premiers and to the ACTU and the CAI explaining
the importance of these decisions. Several notable companies
have announced a freeze or very small salary increases, and
a number of leading figures in the trade union movement
including the President and the Secretary of the ACTU have
both spoken out strongly in support of wage moderation. Mr Dolan,
the President of the ACTU, was reported last week as saying
that more people would have to accept less pay to keep their jobs.

These are examples of Australians recognising that we have 
to work together and that if we act in this way rather than 
pursuing sectional interests in a selfish and shortsighted 
way, then we will be able to work our way through the present 
difficulties and continue to build the kind of economic strength 
and prosperity that we all want for Australia.




                    ---o0o---

