<!--start metadata-->
Title: Immigration
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 6/04/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                              H A






                NA 0 FRABX4, iY LmBA F Œ' ii iii

                                                     6/c)

                       comments on 



                      IF-VPIVAPN 




        Up to la at February Australia's greet Ia , i,,, ,tion progr 





had been supported by all political i artier. It wds something of which







we viers all proud.


         The Government hue been attached because it has bean said that





                        opposed to British aud Southerxiúurppeuus
       rauring Buropeana




           Juite plainly this is not true. Without any hesitation




      that we obtain all the British migrants that we can get and if that 






         not as great as wee would like, it is through no fault of the







 Gova,rtuav nt or the Immi graat ion Bepartrn



         There are mashy propritie a giv -to .gra to from



                                                        Y

        hich are not given to migrants from other countri 



          more to bring out a British migrant then we do to bring out





     fro'!urope. There are no limits plaeed on the number of Ü•h•




                      their vain passage while there are very strict

     ants who wish to pay


                                              The Govern men

                      xsnta from other countries
     to on self paying 



       e every available berth on the United ingdcem-!`4ustr1l is run for 




        migrants.


                                tug 24,500,00 in fares to bring 
          fate yearustralie is 


                                ng Z1,500 00o to assist migrants
                    It 1„1, on 1y
  out British migrant


                                 -e the war ended Z28,5 0,000 has
                    care here. 
  from other sources



  been spent in paying the fates of aeef.ated British migrants, but only






  £í,,500,Q00 has be :n spent in bringing out other migrants.



          The total number of *existed migrants who are Br 1.0h was







  _r     ,

   vp 277 000 from October, 1943, to `une, 1957. This is 4354 of the
  total assisted Intake. In, the asms period, for instance, Lhere were



                        tonals, 2í,a0 assisted from IA alta who 


  30,000 assisted Italian


                        h. The overwhelming proportion of ass

  constitutionally are Br 



                        n British mea though the Government does

  migrants have therefore be








   everything possible it can to attract British migrants to this oountx,y 
   there ere many reasons why we cannot obtain more than we do and why th 









   Government has to severely restrict migration from Luropean sources.

           tiret of all 'i.uropean migration Walla to accumulate «~




                                          y for the full fare
                                      to

        on cornus out here and saves u;. 



      a brother or a sister, a relative or a friend and, ihi, a process

   for

                          .. 2
continue but the Britisher who comes here very r ally thinks of 
Wing money to puy for the fare of a fellow Britisher, Perhaps this 
state of affairs b unfortunate but it is a fact that cannot be
denied,
           oust also rooember that conditions in Great Britain have 
changed tremendously in the last 12 years. After the war there Nets 
quite a lot of unemploymeut. There was despair, unhappiness and fresh 
memories of the bombing which had devustated areas of peat Britain. 
'Under thee° conditio4s many British people decided to migrate. The 
position has now changed. The memories ofthe war years are dim, Thera 
is a high level of employment in Magland as there is in this country 
end the British Government has done less and less to help us in our
Immigration programae.  You will remember when Mr. atacmillan was 
here a short while ago that ho said 3altbough he supported British 
migration to Austrelia, austrulians must realise that British migrante
will become harder and harder to get." The reasons he gave were that 
there was full employment in lingland end, secondly, that economic 
policies in angland hed been designed especielly to keep their skilled 
workers and tradesaan the people who art) most useful in our comunity, 
at haws in the United ICingdom. Ur. Macaillan did not say also, but it 
is true, that when migration first began, the British Government paid 
 quite a fair proportion of the assisted passages. This contribution 
on her part has over the yours been reduced almost to nothing andeven 
with the smell contribution that is still met has come in for sharp
 criticism in England itself.
         Furthermore, it was Mr. Churchill not long ago who enplored 
 his fellow Britons to stay at home and not to desert a sinking ship.
         For all those reasons we cannot get all the British people 
 we would like to have and therefore if we are to do what the Labor 
 party has said it would do, that is ta fix a proportion of 60 British 
 to 40% Buropeans, the only way we could do that is by radically
 reducing migration from Surope, because on the iacts we cannot ineree 
 migration from Britain This would radically reduce the whole programme 
 which would not be to ,',ustraliate advantace when ahe has adequate 
 overseas reserves with which to finance further development.

     The Labor Party fitted: on the Immigration :vrogramme is a 
tragedy because it means that party politics have now been brought 
into every aspect of national policy. They have done this quite 
plainly in an effort to capitalise on e very real and warm affection 
which all lustralians have for Great Britain and its people, but 
we must not forget that development within our resources is vital 
to our survival* The preaent happenings in Indonesia which could 
so eksily become another Korea remind us of this. Development ot 
our country is our price objective, development recuiras people and 
although the British character of this country will not change, wo 
must remember that the people from the old civilisations in Lurope 
who come to %Listralia bring characteristics with than w ich are of 
pint benefit to us. Thor are the people that made ,I.merica groat
and they are the people who will help us to make :,ustralia great. 
In our migration prograni,As it is right that we ipoic as we do to the 
type of person, to his capacitiee and his skill, to whether he will 
be able to rit into our Australian society - it be fulfils these 
requirements he is a good migrant, no matter what his nationality.
      I deplore the fact that this question of British or 
of-.4uropeans has ever been rained* It does a grave disservice to 
our country and coula if the Labor 'iarty idersists in its attitude 
 ma4e Luropean migrants feel they are not so welcome hare, which
 is very far from the truth.

