<!--start metadata-->
Title: Hungary, housing and war service land settlements
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 29/09/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                 3HA 29/9/57 
                                                 3YB 2/10/57

                MALCOLM gH A: ig.'í , MalagR  TO'
                         reports on
          HUNGARY, HOUSING arsi ;4,!.11 S tVIC LAND


         In this article I a - wing to write a few words on Housing, 

War Service Land Setticmont and the Hungarian refugees.

         In the last few days there has been quite u lot of propaganda 

about Hungarians who had been brow: ,ht out here after the unhappy uprising 

but who have been unable to find work or a piece in the Australian war of 

life. These reports are very largely completely without foundation.

         10,255 Hungarian refugees have reached 4.ustralia. These 

include over 4,000 dependants. By far the greater number of

these R ungariaans have found jobs and ppeitiona inside Australia.
690 of these remain in migrant contras without wokk. It is quite 
clear, therefore, that btu far the greater 4iaportion of to .= have

found jobs even though they are arriving in _j',uetrelie at as time when 
employment is in its slackest season and at a time when
employment is ate lower ebb than it has bean for a considerable time.

         Despite these thin ,s, by far the greater proportion of them 

have been successfully 1,.lsoed .

          1. also want to point out that it is ruitea a different 

proposition finding as place in ,ustreliun life for €x Migrant who wishes 

to leave hie own country and come; to this one than for somebody who 

is a r fugee from his on land and who comes here ss as result of
revolution in his own land.    These people have gone through disturbing 

and emotional crises. Many of them aai: speak no Englista, Many of than 

find it difficult to settle nown,to learn English and to decide what they
want to do after they come here.      lieve the Immigration Department 

in this respect hes done a good job crarerning the Hungarian refugees.
          Very lawgely, the criticism of the attemR; t which hua been 

made in offeringhelp to these people has beau done in au effort to die- 

credit the Democracies who have offered asylum and freedom to people who 

have had to flee from their own country and the propaganda in the 

Rusais* satellite countries of Eastern Europe bas, of course, been on

 these lines*

                                              /La st week

  4        Last week tee Government introduced two Bille wnich are
 designed to implement certain aspects of policy beiag dedued over the 
 pest weeks and mont . Ti first of teese Wub the Eousing Bill 
 which implemente the Coeaonwealehle part of the housing eeeeem.nt 
 with the etates. Under teis Lill over Zee eillion ens been :wide 
 aysileble for housing throuehout the Cummunwealth. Zle elllion of 
 ttis sum will find its way to Victoria. Four-fifths of the sum made 
 available or 4.26 aillion '43.1 be .teed by the Stutas for erecting 
 dwellings which will be available for letting. The balance of the 
 money or ene-fifth will be ellareaLeu by the etatea to Building 
 Societies end otir aperoved luaeieutloue which will laud for private 
 home buildine.
           The Uoue           it ie for five years und in the latter
 years of the •(1greement th a&ount that wiil ee meat) aval lable for
 private home builders through Building eaciettes will rise from
 20 to 50. Together with the extra Z5 million, making Z55 million
 in all that is available for War Service Loewe, this measure will do
 e great deal to Lap OlgrO0U0 the housing problems of the different Stetes.
           The Governeent also introduced a Bill on War Lervice Lend
  ettleeeat. The chief purpose of the Bill is to make money available
 to South Australia, eastern euatralia aad Tasmania for War Eervicc
 Land Ccttlemnt or soldiez settlement as it is better erne/in. In 
 addition to this, for the lust two years, the Government has been 
 subsidising 4. and this is not generally known - the esr service Land 
 eettlement Scheme with Au been unaertaken by the principal States, 
New South Wales and Victoria. The maximum subsidy at is £2 million a 
 year for each State an d it is worth noting that the States bed not 
 taken up the full amount in subsidy that has been Saileble by the 
 Comeonwealth. This provision lias mount that the etate, for an 
 expenditure of e4 million, would have had £6 million available,
Z2 million of it from the Comeonwealth.    The purpose of this extra 
 subsidy which was brought in two "are ago, was to try and hasten 
War Service Lens Settlement, not so much in Victoria, a State which 
has done the best job of all, us in eew Loute Wales where few soldiers 
have been settled an where the scheme had been in danger of breaking 
down,

4


        It is wort h notint the although this extra subsidy z-,-o 
 Victoria is a loan and one that has to be repuid over u pLnod of time 
   the State, it has achieved its desired objective la raising the 
 total umountof money spent on War Earvice Land Llettlument in VidDria. 
        In the three years before this, extra subsidy wee introduced
 the States spent about £3 million a year on lair 4Alrvice /mac, ;,ottloments 
 In the first two years of this additional 4g:comsat, the ;Astes' 
 expenditure has run out at about M.2 million and ti o Commonwealth's 
 expenditure has been an extra 2.1.0 million in each year; the 
 instead of out ZS million being spent in oachyoar berora the 
   eement, about f5 zillion has boon spent in each yttie lace the
 •Weament. This, quite obviously, would speed .up tno time in wh 
 settleru nave to wait bei'ore they can Fet their bloots.
        These two Bills the .liouving 1.11.11 and the War Service 
 Ladd Lettlemat Bill — which have just een passed are not ones to 
 achieve wide publicity fro any point of view but they are ones of 
 real import and, in their r..i;spectivc spheres, do 4,, great deal to 
 solve the problems which they were designed to meet,.



  445/9/ 7.

