<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool marketing
Description: press statement
Date: 13/10/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                ~~-

          PRESS STATEMENT ISSUED BY 
          MA LC OLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR 
          WANNON.

        In recent weeks there has been a mounting campaign to
   bring political pressure to bear to achieve changes in the marketing 
   of the Australian wool clip. It will be a sad day for the Industry 
   if it can only solve its problems by direct political action because 
   if this is done, the Wool Industry will become divided and weakened.
        Government policy in relation to Industry matters has been
   to try and create and provide the framework and machinery whereby 
   the Industry can solve its own problems. Such machinery has been 
   provided for the Wool Industry. Until this year, the Industry 
   organisations used to make their own direct approaches to the 
   Government on matters of policy. Thus, the Government often got. 
   conflicting advice and the organisations would find it difficult, 
   j_f not impossible, to reconcile their views.
~•.     The fact that there was no top authority to manage the
   affairs of the Industry was highlighted by the Philp Inquiry. Even 
   though I regretted that this Inquiry did not come forward with a 
   firm recommendation on marketing, it has achieved a great deal for 
   the Industry in that it recommended a framework and an organisation 
   which would give the Industry one strong voice in dealing with 
   Governments and in the management of its own affairs.
        In broad terms, the Australian Wool and Meat Producers'
   Federation, of which the Victorian Wheat and Wool Growers' Association 
   is a part, and the Australian Wool Growers & Graziers' Council, of 
   which the Victorian Graziers' Association is a part, accepted the 
   recommendations of the Philp Inquiry in relation to this matter and 
   asked the Government to.legislate to provide the appropriate 
   machinery. As a result, these two organisations on a Federal level 
   formed what is called the Australian Wool Industry Conference which 
   elects from its members a majority to the Australian Wool Board. 
   The non-grower members on the Board are appointed from names suggest- 
   ed by the Conference and with the approval of the Conference.
        I believe there was unnecessary delay in the appointment
   of the Board after the Government passed its legislation late last 
   year. The Board was only appointed officially on 1st May this year. 
   However, the Board is now functioning and the Conference is function- 
   ing. They should be given an opportunity to prove their worth to 
   the Industry. They have not yet had this. It is not reasonable 
   to condemn the Australian Wool Industry Conference after less than 
   one year's operation and the Australian Wool Board after less than. 
   six months' operation, when, after thirty years of divided council, 
   separate organisations have shown how impossible it is to reach 
   agreement on marketing matters without a forum in which the

                 -2-

   different organisations can meet and settle their differences.
   The Australian Wool Industry Conference and the Australian Wool Board 
   provide such a forum. The Australian Wool Board should not be blamed 
   for failing to do in six months what the divided organisations could 
   not achieve in 30 years.
        Various objections have been made to the Conference and 
   the way that it was established. I myself objected to the fact that 
   the Australian Primary Producers' Union was not included, as did 
   other Members from Victoria and South Australia. But there is 
   provision in the Constitution of the Conference for later inclusion 
   of this organisation.
        The Victorian Wheat and Wool Growers' Association objects 
   to the method of choosing the Conference. The Victorian Association 
   wanted the Conference members to be elected and not appointed by the 
   organisations.
        I have recently had requests that the Government of its 
•  own initiative should abolish the Conference as it now is and provide 
   for an elected Conference. I think it will be seen that the 
   Government has to treat this matter from an overall Australian view- 
   point and the fact is that the two Federal organisations, of which 
   the Victorian Wheat and Wool Growers' Association is a part, want 
   an appointed Conference. The Victorian Wheat and Wool Growers' 
   Association was not able to persuade the Australian Wool and Meat 
   Producers' Federation to support the Victorian Association in this 
   matter. Mr. Green, the President of the Federation, personally told 
   me that he would not have a bar of an elected Conference.
        The Government has assis ted in the creation of this over- 
   all machinery at the request of the two Federal organisations. Can 
   it be seriously suggested that, at the request of one State organisa- 
   tion, the wishes of the two Federal bodies should be ignored and the 
   organisation altered?
        However, this does not mean that the Victorian Association 
   cannot get changes in the Constitution of the Conference. It is 
   open to the Victorian Wheat and Woolgrowers' Association to work 
   through its State Executive, through its State Councils) to try and 
   change the policy of the Federation in relation to these matters 
   and if this was done there would be a good chance of the
   Constitution of the Conference being changed. However, the first 
   prerequisite for success in the Victorian Association's campaign 
   in this direction should be to get support from its Federal body.
        It has been suggested that there should be political
   moves unless there is action approved by the Victorian Wheat and 
   Wool Growers' Association in relation to marketing. It is an odd

   a
~                                -3-
       approach that blames the Government for.the inability of the State 
       organisation to persuade the Federation, of which it is a part, to 
       adopt its policies. This is precisely what such action or threatened 
       action would mean. It would also involve the wool industry in a 
       political brawl which would do grave damage to it and which could 
       end in the destruction of the overall authority and a reversion to 
       the old system whereby the different organisations gave contrary 
       advice to the Government. Government policy has been to create the 
       machinery whereby the Industry can settle its own policy problems. 
       The Industry now has this machinery. It should be used rather than 
       request the Government to step in and dictate an answer.
               The great frustration of many people, of course, lies in 
       the fact that no marketing recommendation has yet come forward. My 
      own views on this have been made plain. I hope that a recommendation 
       can come from the Conference as soon as is possible.
                It should be remembered that on this Conference there is,
      to all intents and purposes, a ready made majority in favour of
      marketing changes. All the members of the Federation are bound by
      policy requiring changes to the marketing system and so is the
      United Graziers' Association of Queensland. This should give a
      clear majority in favour of marketing changes. It is my belief that 
      if the amount of energy directed to politicians in this matter had 
      been directed to the Conference and to the Board by the various State 
      organisations concerned, recommendations on marketing might well 
      have been speeded up.
               Each of the State organisations have their own direct 
      membership on the Conference and what these State representatives
      on the Conference do is, in the final resort, controlled by the
•     members of the organisation in the different States,



      CANBERRA, A.C.T.
         4th October, 1963.,






                                                            '41**-.f2)
                                                  P 7 .%--1.       -

