<!--start metadata-->
Title: Housing
Description: radio talk
Date: 31/05/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 2nd Radio. 1957
                     Radio -31/5/57.
       MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBEV FOR WANNON 
            comments on
            HOUSING.



        Housing is one of the most important and vital needs in till 

 everyday life of every Australians Without adequate housing, it is 

 impossible for young people to make homes and rear families and it is

 impossible for the social, life of our community to function smoothly. 
         quite
        I am/sure every politician wants Australians to be well

 housed, and it does no-one any credit to find that this great problem has 

 been made the subject of larty politics.

       HoweveL, I want to give a complete factual account cf what 

 has happened at the present time and why the building rate,lhas fallen from 

 78,000 to 73,000 houses a year.

        It is wrong to say or imply that since 1947 no progress 

 has been made The overall Australian shortage has been reduced from 

 250,000 to 115,000 and in the first five years of this Government's rule 

 588,000 houses were completed. This is not a bad effort when you considc 

 the great number of migrants who have come into Australia over the same 

 period.

       In iiinaltsztlexIstan Wester% Australia, South Australia 

 and .1teensland the lag is now very small. In the first two States the 

 shortage totals 11,000, while Lueensland actually asked for less manly 

 for housing at the last Premiers, conference than she had in previous year

       In New South Males, the position has been made far worse 

 than it should be by inadequate landlord and tenant laws that have entirel 

 prevented private investors building for rental purposes.

       Furthermore, there are upkarently 40,000 houses in Sydney 

with only one occupant. In past times, under sane landlord or tenant laws 

 these people would, largely, have taken in boarders or let their houses. 

 The leg in New South Wales is still 60,000.

       In Victoria, where a vigorous attack has been made on the 

housing problem, the shortage has been aggravated by a population increase 

 caused by a large influx of migrants; hence the shortage is still cons. 

 siderable even though it has been reduced from 68,000 to 32,000.

       Last year, the Commonwealth initiated a new Commonwealth-
State Housing Agreement. Broadly speaking, the terms were 430 million 
a year for 5 years ataivourable rates of interest.

                        -  ~ -

           A considerable proportion of the money must. be made over 

to co-oper ative societies who will lend money for home ownership an 

opposed to State ownership. In addition, 230 million a year goes into 

War Servies Homes under which 90,00C houses have been built since 1949 

at a cost of 2190 million.

           Thus the Commonwealth has found and still finds about 

one-third of all the moneys going into home building.

           The present outcry has arisen because the building rate 

has fallen from 78,000 to 73,000 houses a year. This reduction has not

come as a result of any direct Commonwealth action. There were no 

directives by the Central Bank on housing though it is true that the 

trading banks are now 1endins less than they were for housing purposes.

           The Commonwealth Savings Bank has also ooze under fire for 

not lending enough for houses. In the Jest year its deposits rose b: 

only 25 million so its scope for lend ing new money has beet small.

           In the same period, the new Savings Banks belonging to 

the various Trading Banks won 290 million in new deposits. It is 

expected that these new Savings Banks will lend considerable sums in the 

future and also that the Trading Banks should be enable d to increase 

their housing loans because of increased deposits comp from a favour- 

able balance of trade and high wool prices.

           These two items have not ifet had time to take effect but 

it is my own personal view that present government policy rests upon the 

supposition that more money will be available from these two sources.

           There is one further point of importance - building costs 
have risen greatly in the past 5 years - mare than in many other 
industries and anyone who has built over that period will know how 
lucky they have been if they have managed to get their bouse completed 
on a firm price.

           Prices have tended to steady in the last 12 months and it 
is most important that caste do not rise again making the price of a 
home too high for an average home seeker. This point has received a 
great deal of attention and it is one that potential home seekers must 
appreciate.

           Very briefly, this is the story of housing.
           If more money is not forthoomizg for housing this year from 
the two sources I mentioned, policies must be reviewed to ensure oonv 
tinted full employment in the building industry and to ensure that 
Australians who went homes get then in as short a time as possible. 
In the -rime Minister's words .... "a home is the foundation of civilis-
ed society, and the home demands a house       e shall not rest 
until we find that this greatest human need has been satisfied.

