<!--start metadata-->
Title: The budget
Description: radio talk
Date: 5/09/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                        I       ~ W~              iit C - ~ .
                            ~~-- '                      f ~.~~~~(
                            {-6-2                rf` r.H e pre sentati ves finished

      debating the Estimates and so the Budget discussions for Sir

 f Arthur Fadden's 11th and final Budget were officially concluded. 

      Parliament made its farewell to Sir Arthur immediately this Debate 

      was finished, because,two days later, the Treasurer had to leave 

      for the United States for the annual discussions with the International 

      Monetary Fund and the International Bank. Thaa;will be his last 

      official duties as the Australian Treasurer.
               The events of last Thursday night were quite extraordinary 
      and I believe will never be repeated.       Ae The Minister for Labour, 
      Mr. Harold Holt, on behalf of the Prime Minister who could not be 
      present, paid eloquent tribute to the w orithat Sir Arthur has done 

      throughout over 20 years of service in the Federal Parliament.
L)    Dr. Evatt replied on behalf of the 0Diosition and described the
      Treasurer as a friend in the true sense of the wort!, even though, 
  e\ he added, the Opposition has not always agreed with his policies. 
/15 Other Members also rose and paid tribute to the Treasurer and 

 d, above all to Lady Fadden, who,probably more than any one else, has
       made Sir Arthur's record breaking term possible.        The Treasurer

       then rose to reply.
                I believe that the general public has always seen the worst

       of the Treasurer.     They have seen him at his worst because they 

       generally know him as he appears on the election platform - a bluff, 
       rough speaker, straight to the point without any of the Prime
       Minister's finesse.     At such meetings the Treasurer sometimes 
       jumped down the throat of interjectors in a way that did not always
       endear him to his audience.      However, people who know him better, 
       who had the privilege to be in the same Parliament with 4im, 
       have learned to know the Treasurer as the most friendly/of men,
       a man without a single enemy in the Parliament.        They have learnt 
       to know he is someone who is highly emotional and who is probably 

       the most human politician in Australia.
                 In replying to the tributes that had been made last
       Thursday night, sir-Arthur was at his best.        He had some wise 
       things to say, which he said in his own way as no one elst can say
       them. He began        "This is a Democrady and as I have said more
                                                           -/

                                         -2-
than once, all the good fellows in this Parliament are not on 
one side of the House. Democracy could not work if that were so. 
it.st as you cannot have all spin-bowlers in a cricket team, so in a 
democratic parliament you must have a team representative of all 
phases of our way of life. A little later he said " The courage 
that I had when I decided to get out of politics has dissipated
like icecream in the sun.              Tonight, I am very sad to leave this
place."
               I had never heard the Parliament so quiet as when the 
Treasurer spoke, Although it was 12 o'clock at night, the House
was full and even the public galleries were crowded.                        I think 
perhaps Sir Arthur realised that the tension was too great and 
 that it needed something to break it, and so the Treasurer, who 
has always had a story very near his lips and who has never missed 
 an opportunity to tell a good one, finished his speech by saying - 
 " I am reminded of the story of two fellows, on9., of whom asked the 
 other, "Bill, have you seen my old woman? Bill said, "I think I 
 did onece, Jack". Jack said, "You know, she is one in a million",
 whereupon Bill replied, "I thought she was won in a raffle".                          I am 
 also reminded of the story of the man who said to-another, "I shall
 never forget the day I- got, married.               I got a: hell of a fright", 
 whereupon his friend said, "Yes, I see you have still got her".
 The Treasurer then ended his speech and his last words in Parliament.
 He had broken the tension, he had broken the                             that had been 
 caused by the tributes that had been paid him. He has left the 
 ;arliament , but every man in that Parliament is still his friend.









                                                   ,f,~c~~'
    a                    ~~~4                               ~'~

