<!--start metadata-->
Title: Export industries
Description: Press release
Date: 11/09/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS RELEASE

By Mr Malcolm Fraser, Member for War.._non and Minister
for Education and Science.

                              Because Australia has to export in order to live, it
is of great interest when a reduction in overseas shipping
freights is arranged.
                              Agreements negotiated with the Conference lines based
on the new rates would involve a saving of 70c a bale on wool
shipped from Australia to Europe.
                              A decrease in rates is also negotiated for canned fruit,
manufactured goods, beef and butter, among other products.
                              The announcement of lower freight rates is important
not only to sectional or regional interests, but to most areas
of activity.
                              Australia exported goods valued at $3045 million last
financial year and imported goods worth $3268 million.
                              We are the twelfth most important trading nation in the
world.
                              All sectors of the economy, then, are affected by our
trading fortunes.
                              To secure our export income, we have to sell a vast
range of goods.
                              Apart from our rural exports — which normally make up
more than 70% of our export trade — we sell goods like carpets
to Canada, soup powders to Senegal, paints to the Philippines,
and machine tools to Malaysia.But we are a long way from our markets and import supplies,
so that shipping rates have a significant effect on our costs.
                              The reductions arranged — the first since 1936 — follows
the 'rationalisation' of shipping services.
                              In 1964 the Department of Trade and Industry, with the
aim of improving the efficiency and economy of shipping services,
made a study which revealed that large savings could be made
by operating and scheduling all the ships in the Britain—Continent
service as a single fleet.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /2

        -2-

   The scheme was implemented in September, 1966,
by the Britain-Continent Conference for the Australian
trade.
   As a result, shipping interests were able to announce
in July this year that ships had loaded at 12% fewer ports
in Australia, and discharged at 20% fewer ports in Europe.
   The average outward voyage took more than three days
less, while the voyage from Australia was reduced by more
than six days.
   A leading export authority pointed to the potential
benefits in improving the handling and packaging of export
goods.
   Wool interests, because of the changes taking place
in handling and packing of wool, were invited to consider
putting forward a case that may result in freight reductions.
   The Federal Government has been active on other fronts
affecting overseas shipping.
   Under a joint-venture plan, a new Australian vessel
being built in Japanwill enter into the Japan-Australia
trade with Japan's K-Line.
   It has been proposed that the Japanese line also operate
a ship under this arrangement.
   Last year Australia exported goods valued at nearly
$643 million to Japan, our biggest trade customer.
   And recently the Prime Minister, Mr Gorton, told
Parliament that the Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr
McEwen, would make inquiries in London 'relevant to possible
Australian participation in shipping.'
   He said the Government was interested in carrying some
Australian goods in Australian ships, as had been evidenced by
arrangements with the Japanese K-Line.

