<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters, wool sales, Portland trade, Education and Science ministry
Description: Radio talk
Date: 5/09/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                              Sunday 5 September 1971
                              Thursday 9 September 1971





            TEXT OF RADIO TALK BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, 

             MEMBER FOR WANNON & MINISTER FOR EDUCATION 

                        & SCIENCE





             Today I want to talk about three or four matters - 
       about the countout in the Federal Parliament, the opening of 

       the wool sales, the development of Portland trade and my 
       resumption of the responsibilities of Education and Science.


             On the last day of sitting, the Parliament was counted
--gek• out. That means that when the quorum bells rang there were not 
       sufficient members in the Parliament in terms of the standing 

       orders to enable the sitting to continue. At that time, there 
       were about 35 Government Members and about 5 Opposition Members 

       in the Parliament. It is in fact the Government's responsibility 

       to see that the numbers are maintained, and the Government must 

       carry the responsibility. I am quite certain it will do so in 

       the future even if there are going to be very few members of the 

       Opposition within the Parliament itself. Ironically, Eddy Ward, 

       who is one of the most redoubtable fighters that the Opposition 
       has ever had, had been trying to get the Government counted out 

       during his many years in the Parliament over a very long period 

       of time. He never succeeded in doing so, and when it did happen
  411  it happened very much by accident. It was not planned, it was 

       just one of those things that occur. I am quite sure that all 

       members in the Government parties will be taking the matter 

       seriously to see that the numbers are maintained.


             In this last week we have seen the opening of the wool 

       sales, and as I record this talk the second day of the sales are 

       designed to continue. There was a warning from the Minister for 

       Primary Industry that if demand for wool at the sales did not 
       pick up, the sales might be again suspended. The disastrous 

       opening was very much a result of international currency crisis 

       caused by movements in overseas financial arrangements by major 

       trading countries in the world. It has been specifically 

       prompted by action taken by President Nixon to preserve the 
       status of the United States dollar. It is going to be

                -2-


  difficult to see how these changes and arrangements ultimately 
  work themselves out but we've certainly seen the impact of the 
  uncertainty they've caused on the wool sales this week.

       In these circumstances, the 36 cents guaranteed price 
  as an Australian average for the entire clip becomes of much 
  greater significance than was originally thought, perhaps, to 
  every Australian wool grower. It might well cost the Treasury 
  much more than had been anticipated. Incidentally, I am told 
  that there is still doubt by a number of people as to how this 
  deficiency or subsidy payment will work. If anyone has questions 
  to ask about it if they write to me, I'll certainly answer
• immediately and give them what information I have.

       The third matter that I would like to mention concerns 
  trade through the port of Portland and this week we have seen 
  some encouraging reports about the build up of trade through the 
  Port. The Harbour Trust Commissioners and all those involved 
  must take the credit for it. While the news of the trade through 
  the Port was generally good, it is unfortunate that developments 
  of recent years have reduced trade through the Port on some items. 
  I understand these are largely wool, butter, dairying products 
  or frozen meat that go overseas in containers through Melbourne.

       In relation to these matters, Sir William Gunn wrote an
41/ interesting speech a few days ago in which he pointed out that if 
  you are going to use the cheapest methods of transport within 
  Australia, Portland should be one of the major ports, that it 
  should be used much more than is now the case. This would, of 
  course, involve changed shipping arrangements but he indicated 
  that the Australian Wool Board is looking into these matters. 
  Sir William pointed out that this would be possible by using the 
  cheapest method of transport within Australia, by the abandonment 
  of restrictive legislation, which in fact establishes in many 
  instances a state railway monopoly. If you did this, it would be 
  possible to save about $1.20 a bale for the whole wool clip and 
  this would be $62 million - $62 million which would mean a great 
  deal to wool growers and certainly a sum which is worth going out 
  after, in Sir William Gunn's words. I understand that this is 
  what the Wool Board is seeking to do.

    The last matter that I would like to mention concerns 
resumption of my own responsibilities for the Commonwealth 
Ministry of Education and Science. I enjoyed this particular 
portfolio up to two years ago when I moved to Defence.
Education is close to the knees of a very large number of people. 
It is important for the future well-being of a very large part 
of Australia. Above all else, investment in education is 
investment for the future and the future strength and well-being 
and quality of Australia.

    In recent times, education from Commonwealth and State 
resources has been attracting an increasing share of national 
wealth, and there are many needs in this particular area as I 
well know. Amongst my first tasks in getting up to date with 
what's been happening will be to make contact with the State 
Ministers, with those responsible for the independent education 
systems so that I may again be fully aware of how all the 
responsible authorities feel about these matters.

    C.S.I.R.O., of course, also comes within my 
responsibilities and here again I am glad to have contact with 
an organisation which ought to be able to do a great deal by 
its research to assist primary producers of one kind or another. 
I have already had initial talks with the Chairman of C.S.I.R.O. 
and will be looking forward to hearing what their views are in 
the way the Organisation can best assist producers in the 
current situation. I know the Organisation is conducting a major 
review of all its wool research. I am not sure yet that many 
of us realise how much the need for research has in fact altered. 
The question used to be "how can we get maximum production per 
acre," and that automatically in high wool price years gave the 
maximum return to the farmer. But now the emphasis on research 
needs to be how to get the cheapest production per acre, and 
this might involve some changed orientation of the C.S.I.R.O's 
research effort. This is the matter which the Organisation has 
under active review at the present time.

