<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters
Description: radio talk
Date: 12/04/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK                    Sunday, 12 April
                               Thursday, 16 April


       BY THE HONOURABLE MALCOLM FRASER, M.P., MINISTER FOR DEFENCE
                 AND MEMBER FOR WANNON

     I wonder how many people know what it's like to be a duck sitting on a 
lake on opening day of the season. You don't know from what direction you're going 
to be shot at, you don't know if you will be left alone and you don't know if you 
will be driven off your favourite ground.
     I think a lot of Ministers often feel like a duck on opening day during 
Question Time. This takes place at the beginning of each Parliamentary sitting 
and lasts up to 1—hour. Questions are without notice. They come from your friends 
and-your own party, they come from the Opposition. They can be designed genuinely 
to seek information. The Opposition, and this is their task, often seek to ask 
questions which will embarrass a Minister or embarrass the Government.
     You never know from which direction the shot is coming. You never know the 
subject matter that will be raised. Theoretically, you are not meant to be asked 
questions about matters of policy but if a Minister tries more than once or twice to 
say — "This is a matter of policy and therefore I am not going to answer it", he will 
soon find himself badgered more and more at Question Time. Occasionally, you will 
find a Minister saying — "I don't know the answer to that. I'll find out and let the 
Honourable Member know". You can do this once or twice, but by and large you are 
expected to know the answers, and this means that you need to have a pretty good 
understanding of the workings of your Department.
     The questions can cover any aspects of the administration of your
Department and this is a very wide field indeed. During Question Time you will find 
all Members of the Parliament in the Chamber, the press galleries are packed and the 
visitors galleries are also generally full. Unless there are debates of particular 
significance, Question Time is always the favourite time for visitors.
     You don't have to listen to any one Member for too long. It's a little bit 
like a variety show with a change of players every few minutes. The atmosphere 
sometimes becomes quite tense and the Speaker finds it necessary to intervene. 
Questioners sometimes seek to give information instead of sticking to their brief 
and asking a question; they sometimes seek to make a mini speech and this theoretically 
is against the Standing Orders. If he does go too long, the Speaker will call him to 
attention and direct him to ask his question promptly. The answer is always in the 
hands of the Minister concerned and theoretically he can go on for quite a long while 
in providing an answer if he wanted to, and if he was unwise enough to run the risk 
of incurring the displeasure of pretty well every Member of the House.
     Question Time is jealously guarded by all Members of Parliament and 
especially by Private Members because it provides an opportunity to probe and to seek 
information over a variety of subjects. There are those who ask questions about

                      2.

 matters that affect their own particular electorates. There are even those who ask 
 questions about particular individuals, when it would probably be more appropriate to 
 speak or write to the Minister concerned and then there are, of course, questions of 
 major importance which would touch at the heart of national policy in a number of areas.
      Once a number of years ago I was in the Canadian Parliament at Question Time 
 and they have some odd procedures which I am quite sure would not survive in Australia. 
 I heard somebody ask their Prime Minister a question, Lester Pearson was the Prime 
 Minister at the time. Before Lester Pearson could get to his feet to answer, the 
 Speaker rose and said that he thought that the questioner had put a great deal of 
 thought and effort into the preparation of his question and that he would therefore 
 like to offer the Prime Minister some advice. He thought the Prime 'Minister should 
 consider the question and come back. with an answer on the next sitting day. However, if 
 despite this advice the Prime Minister insisted on saying something. The Speaker said 
 that he may.
      I haven't ever noticed any Speaker in Australia trying to tell any Prime 
 Minister what he should do in such blunt terms. Can you imagine any of the Speakers 
 taking this attitude with Sir Robert Menzies?
     It may be because I have been in the Parliament now nearly 15 years, but
 I believe that a certain vigour went out of the Parliament when Eddie Ward died, the 
 Member for East Sydney. He was a most vigorous and effective member of the
 Opposition. He had many political enemies, but you always knew where you were with 
 Eddie Ward. He would fight for the things in which he believed to the bitter end and 
 he would use every tactic to achieve this objective. But he never let up. He
 never became tired of years of opposition. He never gave the Government a rest. He 
 and Clyde Cameron between them were an effective pair in opposition and on many 
 occasions especially at Question Time used to keep the Parliament on their toes.
     When Eddie Ward died a good deal of the vigour seemed to go out of the 
 Opposition's fight and out of Question Time and I don't really think anything that's 
 happened since has replaced it.
     Questions can cover a very wide variety of subjects. National matters 
 concerning foreign affairs and defence, major matters concerning primary industries, 
 the export of kangaroos, matters in New Guinea, the improper use of pesticides, the 
 importation of beans and peas from New Zealand, the danger of inflammable clothing, 
 the use of drugs, the export of merino rams, questions of tariffs, the availability 
 of influenza vaccine — these are all matters that can and have been raised at Question 
 Time in the first three weeks of this Autumn Session of Parliament.
     Mr. Bury has `been questioned about rural interest rates and he has indicated
 that he's been having negotiations with. the Governor of the Reserve Bank concerning 
 them. In Question Time the Treasurer has pointed out the importance of inflation and 
 the need to curb inflationary pressures. Billy Wentworth, Minister—in—Charge of 
Aboriginal Affairs, is always vigorous in his answers and in his efforts to promote 
greater attention to the problems of aborigines.

                       3.

     While any Member can rise at any time for a question, traditionally the 
Opposition is given the first opportunity and this is generally taken by the Leader 
of the Opposition, then a member of the Government side is called to ask his question 
and then the questions go alternately between Government members, either the Liberal 
Party or the Country Party, and the Opposition. It's generally the most lively part 
of the day and the most interesting part of the day, but I turn from the point at 
which I started. I think most Ministers feel that it's like a duck sitting on a pond 
at opening day. They don't know whose going to take a shot at them or from what 
direction it will come. They don't know the size or the number of the shot.
     If a Minister demonstrates any weakness at Question Time, he merely invites 
further questions and greater difficulties for himself. There is one very good rule 
in Question Time. If you don't know the answer, don't pretend that you do. The House 
will always live with the person who says honestly — "I'm afraid I can't give the 
Honourable Member an answer at the moment but I'll seek information for him and let him 
know". If anyone tried to stumble his way through an answer not really knowing what it 
should be; if anyone tried to bluff the House without sufficient knowledge of this 
subject, then he is likely to be dealt with without a great deal of mercy.

