<!--start metadata-->
Title: South Africa
Description: press statement
Date: 24/04/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


, PP. `Ss STATiM.ÔNT:
    LCOLM FRAS iz                                April 24th, 1960

            In the last few weeks it has been common to hear people say we 
  should do something about South Africa. They could mean through Australia, 
  the :British Commonwealth lth or the United Nations. It is one thing to say 
  something ought to be done, but quite another to suggest something useful
  and sensible.
             Does anyone really believe that a resolution pasted by the 
  Australian Parliament, the House of Commons or the United Nations is going 
  to alter the determination of Dr. Verwoerd and his party to press on with 
  the policies which they hove avowed to maintain?
             Same people in other countries have suggested that trade 
  sanctions should be held against South Africa. If this were done, the 
  sanctions would probably harm the native people whom we are trying to help 
  such more than they would harm Dr. Verwoerd and his supporters. For
  instance, the greater part of Australia's trade with south Africa is in 
  fish. The fishermen of South Africa are 100% native. If we said we 
  would have a trade boycott of that country by refusing to take their fish, 
  we would not be hurting Dr. Verwoerd and his party but we would be doing
  great harm to the native population. If we examine the position of 
  trade, we would probably find that in nearly every case, any question of 
  sanction or boycott would harm the natives much more than Dr. Verwoerd 
  and his party. As we well know, the natives have very few financial 
  reserves and they would not be able to maintain themselves and their 
  families without continuous employment.
              I have not heard anyone suggest that military action of some
  kind should be taken by the United Nations against South Africa. Quite 
  clearly, such a course is out of the question. Nobody is going to war 
  over South Africa. What then do people mean when they say something 
  should be done?
               It appears then that a resolution passed by any country of 
  the United Nations would have no effect in South Africa and could, indeed, 
  harden the hearts of present leaders in that country. Furthermore, it 
   seers that trade sanctions would have the reverse effect of what we would 
  want and no one in any country has seriously suggested that force should
   be used against the present Government of South Africa.

        I do not know what other action people have in mind when they say 
that something should be done about South Africa. It is something that
is always left vague and indefinite.   Ws should remember that although 
the native population has been denied certain political opportunities,. 
the Government of south ,.frica can be changed. The present Government 
Dr. Verwoerd arai his party ó are, at some future time, going to have to 
face the electors in : outh Africa and that will be all the white people 
of the Uhion.
        Quite clearly, there are a great number of white people in
South Africa who are as upset, disappointed and ashamed of what has 
happened es we in this country are. Do we think that we here are the 
only ones who want to see the course of events changed, because clearly, 
there are many people in South Africa who also want the course of events 
in their own country changed and they will most certainly be working 
until next election time to see that a different party ie put in power.
       After all, is not this the right answer to this problem? South 
Africa is a democracy (if we can for a moment forget that Africans have
been denied political opportunities).  It is a country in which the
Government can be changed peacefully and legally.  The present Govern- 
ment has taken a course of action which now appears to be leading the 
country to more and more bloodshed. Do we really think that in a 
country where a party has to face the electors at an election that a 
government can survive what has happened in recent days and what will 
probably happen again if this policy is continued? so far as the world 
is concerned, and so far as south Africa is concerned, it will be much 
the most healthy thing if this policy can be changed from within South 
Africa without outside interference. Surely there is hope of that.
        There is one other aspect of this problem which heeds looking 
into. There are suggestions that a move will be made to expel South 
Africa from the British Commonwealth or the Commonwealth of Nations 
it is now called. This action would appear to be a rash proposition. 
Should we expel a country because people who are temporarily ruling 
that country appear to be acting in a harsh, unreasonable and oppressive 
fashion. If we expelled South Africa, probably Dr. Verwoerd and his
party would not mind in the least, but very likely millions of

native Africans would be upset by that move. They may well look to 
membership of the British Commonwealth as the best means of ensuring 
their future opportunity and their future equality. Surely they 
realise that in the Commonwealth more people have won their own freedom, 
their own democracy and their own selfógovernment than in any other 
group of nations in the history of the world, and most of this move- 
ment has taken place in the last 15 or 20 years, when India, Pakistan, 
Malaya, Ceylon, Ghana and others have achieved :Jo:minion status ó
equal status within the Commonwealth. It is the only group of nations 
in which every colour, every race and every creed are represented in 
complete and absolute equality. Surely then, membership of the 
Commonwealth is some guarantee for the native people of South Africa 
and for this reason it would appear to be a rash 311070 to suggest that 
South Africa should be expelled from the Commonwealth because its 
present political party in power is taking the course of action that 
it has.
             If the other members of the Commonwealth can, in this 
trouble of South Africa, show an understanding of the problems of 
that country, it is my belief that we will ultimately see the present 
Government changed at the elections within South Africa and that we 
will also see the present policy of apartheid changed and modified 
in ways that would probably please us all. This is probably the best 
answer to the problem of South Africa. Indeed, it may well be the 
only peaceful answer.

