<!--start metadata-->
Title: Expansion and stability
Description: press statement
Date: 23/08/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATr T         August 23rd,1959
1dALCOLM FRASER
         EXPANSION & STABILITY
       The first week of the Spring session has given us 
a great deal to talk about; not only did the Treasurer introduce an 
extremely interesting Budget, but two days latir both the Prime 
Minister and the Minister for External Affairs made statements on 
foreign policy and the general overseas position. I am afraid any 
comment on these latter statements will have to wait because in the 
next two or three weeks I want to talk about the Budget.
       Firstly, I think I should say something about the 
general principles which are underlying this present Budget. The 
Government has now completed ten years in office. The years have 
not all been quiet ones and the Government has had its difficulties, 
but from that time population has grown by two million, nearly half 
of which has come from migration. 750,000 houses and flats have 
been built and nearly 1 million new motor vehicles have been 
registered. Other figures could be shown to prove striking 
industrial progress and in the rural sector production is in many 
cases higher than it has ever been. Although the wool industry 
has been going through a period of difficulty due to low prices 
average production has increased 50A Over the ten years.
        The question which the Treasurer put during his 
speech was whether or not this progress and development can be 
equalled or surpassed in the next decade. There is no reason why 
this should not be possible. We start from a better position than 
we had ten years ago. There are no crippling shortages of materials, 
equipment, fuel or power which then restricted progress on every hand
        Twelve months ago the Government thought Australia 
faced a difficult trading year. Prices for exports were low, and 
we looked like running into a heavy trading deficit with other 
countries.

                           111.111,
               Due to many factors which include an unusually 
high overseas investment in this country over the last twelve 
months, and also a rise in the wool prices towards the close of 
the season, Australia ended the 1958/59 financial year in a very 
sound position — overseas reserves fell by as little as £10 million.
                ith the possible exception of the wool industry, 
which has not yet solved its problems, Australia is in a better 
position than it was twelve months ago. The Treasurer felt 
strongly that we had a stable base from which it was possible to 
plan and prepare the progress of the next ten years.
               Edith this in mind, the Government has already come 
to agreements with the states which will be increasing by £5 million 
Commonwealth aid for roads for this year, and by £36 million the 
tax reimbursement for the different States. So far as its own 
accounts are concerned the Government has made alterations to 
social, service benefits in line with the recent basic wage rate. 
It has begun reor nization of the Postmaster-General's Departmen 
which I will deal with next week, also it has made a 54 reduction 
in the income tax payable by individuals; this reduction will 
apply from the beginning of this financial year. Various other 
small incentives to further investment and to email companies have 
been introduced. One of the most significant items in the budget 
was the increase to 125,000 in the annual immigration intake. 
This is a mark of great confidence in Australia's future.
               Total receipts for the year will be just under 
41,400 million. This is an increase of nearly £100 million over 
last year. Total expenditure will be nearly £60 million more than 
receipts. You will remember that last year the Government budgeted
for a deficit of £110 million. This turned out, in fact, to be 
just under £30 million. This was because Government loans attracted 
much better support than had been expected, because wool prices 
rose at the end of the year and because overseas people invested 
more than had been expected in Australia. These three factors 
may not work to the same advantage this year.

              3

       The Government does not feel that any great 
or drastic stimulus is needed at the present time to maintain 
the high level of employment which is a most important social 
and economic obligation; it considers the small stimulus given 
by the deficit of £60 million will be sufficient to maintain 
Australia's general expansion while at the same time preserving 
stability. The budget lays the foundation of progress for
the next decade.
       Next week I will talk about detailed aspects 
of various changes being undertaken in the Postmaster--General's 
Department. Even though there has been considerable 
dissatisfaction with some of these proposed changes I believe 
two of the most important will work to the very real benefit 
of rural areas. However, that's for next week,

