<!--start metadata-->
Title: Balance of payments
Description: press statement
Date: 2/05/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATELEVT : 

 MALCOLM FRASER :


                         May 2nd, 1965


           In the past two or three weeks many people have 
 expressed concern at recent action taken by the United States and by 
the United Kingdom Governments to improve the balance of payments 
position of these two countries.

           The effect of what the United States has done 
 could be particularly important, not only for Australia but for all the 
major trading countries in the world. It is important that we under- 
stand the reasons for this action.

           For several years the United States has had a 
deficit on her overseas account, caused largely by the extent of her 
Foreign Aid programs and by her investment abroad. The deficit in the 
overall balance had been between $3 to $4 billion a year. The 
President has now obviously decided that this cannot continue. The 
United States says that the program which has been outlined has been 
dedigned primarily against the developed countries of Europe (excluding 
Britain) which have been building up very large surpluses, but there are 
many people who believe it will be administratively impossible for the 
United States to isolate the effects of her program in an appropriate 
manner. They fear that the program will flood over and affect
countries like Australia and many other less developed countries.

           These effects could be two-fold. On the one hand, 
if American companies in Australia carry out the voluntary program out- 
lined by the President they will slow down the rate of new investment in 
this country, increase the return of profits to the United States, and 
use their own prestige and standing and industrial knowledge to raise 
capital inside Australia which will not be voting capital but which will 
be in fixed interest bonds of one kind or another. This kind of capital 
would mean that the Australian funds attracted by the companies would not 
give Australians an appropriate share interest in the companies.

           In summary this could mean that there will be an 
outflow of funds from Australia to American on the one hand, and a greatly 
reduced flow of new investment from America on the other. This would 
clearly create balance of payments problems for Australia.

          While many Australians express some concern at the 
nature of some foreign investment in Australia, we must remember that we 
are trying to expand and develop this country as rapidly as we possibly 
can, and that Australia with a population of twenty, fwenty five or thirty 
million will be much more secure than an Australia of twelve million people. 
Thus we have a large and increasing immigration program. We are importing 
people; we believe at the same time that it is necessary to import capital, 
and in many cases the industrial knowledge that comes with capital. The 
alternative is to reduce our rate of development and we should all be 
opposed to this.

          The secondary effect of the American program could 
also be severe and could have dramatic implications for world trade. If 
the American program corrects the deficit in the United States balance of 
payments, this will tend to put other countries into deficit. If the 
program is directed primarily agains European countries like France and 
Germany and, as a result, these countries go into deficit, they will take 
countervailing action of one kind or another. These countries are not 
large traditional capital exporters, and therefore they would be likely




                              /2

               _ 2



to cure their deficit by reducing purchases from abroad. Since they are 
both in the Common market they might persuade all the Common Market 
countries to act in concert. In other words, the American action could 
well trigger off a series of actions by many countries, all designed to 
improve their own particular position, all designed to buy less from 
other countries, and when this sort of thing happens finance for world 
trade becomes very difficult indeed.

         The techniques of this are perhaps difficult to 
explain, but the result is fairly simple. It would mean in effect that 
finance to purchase wool or meat or butter from Australia, or secondary 
industry goods from some other country, would not be available as 
readily as it has been in the pasti It would tend to mean that each 
country would be forced back on to its own individual resources. This 
woúld be particularly hard on the developing countries, in which group 
Australia must be included in this context. If these trends came about 
and nothing was done to overcome them it could lead to a world—wide 
recession in trade, and to a cobsequent recession in individual countries. 
I believe this is unlikely because many people will be aware of the dangers 
and will be working to see that they don't arrive.

         The Government has shown that it appreciates the 
importance of the problem in the Treasurer's visit to Washington to put 
our point of view, not only as these matters would affect Australia but 
as they will affect world trade in general. This visit by the Treasurer 
will be followed by the Prime Minister's own visit on his way to the Prime 
Minister's conference in June.

         It is too early yet to say what the result may be or 
how severely the new American policies will work, but it is a matter 
which will have to be watched very closely indeed.

