<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry, Shortland Affair
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 4/06/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                  3HA Sunday, 4 June, 1972. 
                                                  3YB Thursday, 8 June, 1972. 
      BROADCAST:                                  3LK Tuesday, 6 June, 1972.



               The Wool Industry has faced some pretty substantial
      difficulties in recent times, the main one from our point of view 
      in western Victoria being the slump in world price for our
      product last year.
 •             The position has, of course, improved since then, although 
      we are unlikely to see a return to the great boom days of the 
      early 1950's.
               With this in mind, it is not without its irony to note 
      that wool's main competitors, synthetic fibre manufacturers, are 
     undergoing a period of strain.
               The makers of synthetics have for a long time organised
      themselves better than we in the Wool Industry have done. They 
     have provided their customers with a more convenient service,
     made it easier to order, buy and receive their products.  This
•    kind of streamlined marketing is something I have been arguing for 
     ever since I was a backbencher and at last, it seems, something 
     is being done about it.
               But to return to synthetics, I am sure the Australian 
     Wool Board was not unhappy to be able to report in a recent
     bulletin that the synthetic fibre industry had faced unprecedented
     trouble and chaos.   It certainly seems true that the manufacturers 
     of synthetics are facing enormous difficulties as a result of 
     over-protection in one form or another.


                                                         .../2

                                   2.
             It appears that the cause of it all was the American 
    manufacturers' tardiness in developing I.C.I.'s crimplene process 
    and the speed with which the European manufacturers sought to fill 
    the gap in the American market.
             By the time the Americans had geared to increase 
    production and the Europeans and Asian manufacturers had run into 
    U.S. tariff and quota difficulties, the situation had become, to
•   say the least, awkward.
             The Wool Board details the financial problems of some of 
    the big manufacturers of synthetics, but finishes its review on a 
    sober and realistic note.
             "The cold fact is," says the Wool Board, "that in the
    long term, wool alone cannot sustain high market levels. It is
    part of the broad textile scene and must be affected by serious
    instability in other sectors.  The more the synthetic producers 
    fight among themselves, the more severe will be their price
    cutting and the greater the temptation for processors to substitute 
III cheaper fibres.
             "Incongruously, therefore," the Board says, "woolgrowers 
    should be relieved that man-made fibre prices seem to have reached
    rock bottom.  A gradual increase is likely, if only for the reason
    that the rising cost of oil, basis for most synthetics, labour 
    and borrowed capital must eventually be recouped."
             The Wool Board's point is well made. However good wool
    is, we must always remember it is a fibre among fibres. In our
    production, promotion and marketing, this must always be in our 
    minds.

                                   3.


             Allegations of fraud, blackmail, conspiracy and forgery
        are unpleasant under any circumstances. When they are associated
        with Australian public life, with our Parliament and Government, 
        then they are particularly distressing.
             When I hearithese very charges being made in the House
       of Representatives recently I was gravely concerned. My
       concern, and that of many members on both sides of the House,
•      transcended Party politics, because they came from a highly 
       respected member of Federal Parliament who is not given to 
       intemperate outbursts and who had obviously given the whole 
       affair his deepest consideration.
             I am, of course, referring to the Shortland affair. 
       Charlie Griffiths is about to retire after twenty-three years 
       as member for Shortland in the Newcastle area.
             You are all familiar with the bitter wrangling that has
       been going on for a year or more in the rush to obtain party
       endorsement to succeed Mr. Griffiths, who represents what has 
       been regarded as a safe seat.
             An embittered Mr. Griffiths felt obliged to make this 
       whole affair the subject of what was perhaps his final speech 
       in Federal Parliament.
             He called on either the Federal or N.S.W. Governments to 
       inquire into his allegations before all the evidence was removed 
       or destroyed.
             I only wish to say that it is a great pity that a man, who 
       had served long and with honour in the House of Representatives, 
       should have to deliver such a speech as what may prove to be his 
       swansong in public life.


       For further information:  Collin Myers
                                 Telephone Canberra 73 3261

