<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor Party Opposition
Description: radio talk
Date: c1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                        74ViAn . /\tV .n
K                                                                   ()


            To have heeded Opposition members beforehand, one would have 
     expected a telling and hard—hitting censure motion against the 
     Government in Canberra last Tuesday. There would be a concerted attack 
     and the government would be harassed, it was said. The want—of—confidence 
     motion, a grave and serious device in Parliamentary procedure, took 
     precedence over all other business.
            But what an anti—climax it all was Patchy .. lack—lustre .. 
     damp squib .. these were some of the descriptions applied to the speech 
     of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr lThitlam, by the newspapers the next 
     morning. The much—vaunted 'censure' motion was unable to crash because 
     it just did not get off the ground. As the Prime Minister described 
     Mr Whitlam's effort ... 'It is a broken—winded, broken mouthed, broken 
     down old crock of a motion put by a rider worthy of that kind of steed.'
            Opposition speakers groped vainly for material to support their 
     move, to invest it with the promised high drama that would have the 
     government squirming with embarrassment. But they scratched about in vain, 
     and it indeed appeared that the Opposition Leader himself seemed almost 
     bored with the exercise a few minutes after he began speaking.
            Not one argument was brought to light that the Prime Minister, 
     Government Ministers and other speakers were not able to effectively 
     counter or on which they were unable to put the record straight.
            The Opposition Leader attempted to launch his argument by 
     complaining that the strategic assessment supplied by the Government's 
     advisers had been in Cabinet's hands for 12 weeks and that Cabinet had 
     done nothing to deal with a review of the Government's defence policies. 
     It was pointed out to Mr Whitlam that the strategic paper was concerned 
     with various assessments of Australia's strategic approach right into the 
     1980's. Was it seriously argued that 12 weeks was going to make a great 
     difference in such a long—term view, when there were so many unknowns and 
     so many imponderables? We are involved in Vietnam. We have interest 
     in Malaysia and Singapore. Our forces are deployed in these areas. 
     We have a continuing interest in the region, and as the situation clarifies 
     we will have more light thrown on the future path along which Australia's 
     interests lie. But because of the clouds now obscuring our view, it is not
                                                                             /2

                               -2-


possible to go beyond the short-term in projecting our forward posture 
 in the region. This short-term period takes us up until the end of 1971, 
 the cut-off point for Britain's military presence in Malaysia and 
Singapore. It was decided in principle recently - as the Prime Minister 
announced - to retain in the Malaysia-Singapore area two squadrons of 
Mirage jet fighters, two naval ships and an Anzac Battalion, and we would 
take part in arrangements for the conduct of the jungle warfare school 
in Malaysia.
         The decision-in-principle was made known to the two South-East 
Asian countries involved, our attitude being that before the decision 
can become absolute we must know what assistance can be offered by the 
two countries in matters like provision of support for our ground troops.
         The Prime Minister argued that if the Opposition Leader suggested
that precise longer-term decisions should be taken now before the 
imponderables had been resolved with greater clarity, then he was 
advocating an irresponsible course. In effect, Mr \.hitlam was 'seeking to 
play politics with national survival.'
         It was pointed out in the House that whenever there had been a
want-of-confidence motion (and they were comparatively rare occasions) 
that they had focussed on a single urgent point of urgency. But the 
Opposition Leader's speech ranged over a very wide field - as he said 
himself, over the responsibilities of some 'dozen or fifteen ministers.'
         On defence he claimed to see deep trouble in the fact that there
had been no new three year defence review. The Minister for Defence pointed 
out that the last three year defence program encompassed the most far-reaching 
re-organisation and re-equipment of the defence services, and much of this 
equipment was still to be delivered.
         Mr Whitlam took a feeble side-swipe at the Government's record in 
welfare. This was easy to counter as the Government has taken special 
steps to help the sick, the poor and the old and is moving to bring further 
comfort to those in these categories.
         The Opposition devoted one sentence to the primary industries. The 
Minister for Primary Industry hit back by detailing the Government's records 
in this field - help in overcoming the effects of devaluation and drought,/3

•


                 —3—


    and aid like the increased superphosphate bounty.
        The Government side was put strongly by the Prime Minister to
    counter allegations of gaps in oil policy. In September, 1965, all
    Australian oil producers were given 67c a barrel as an added incentive
    to search for oil. This payment was to apply up to September, 1970.
    In the case of small producers the extra cost per gallon as well as
    freights have been absorbed into the Australian price structure without
    any undue increase in price to consumers or effect on the economy.
    But the big oil finds in Bass Strait on which the 67c a barrel was
    due to be paid would have added considerably tothe price per gallon to
    the consumer and affect the economy. Negotiations took place and the Bass
    Strait producers agreed to forego not only the 67c a barrel incentive
    payment but a further 5c a barrel as well. This meant a reduction of
    just over 2c a gallon in the price refineries would otherwise have had
    to pay for the oil, and a consequent saving to the consumer.
        In their abortive attempt to find a target to hit, the Opposition
    lashed blindly about them on tariffs, the Post Office, health, rail lines,
    decentralisation, the death penalty, the study of fish, urban development,
    local government finance, and shipping. Presumably they expected to score
    somewhere - but their shots were Wiekily,nullified. The Minister for
    Shipping and Transport spoke of the revolution in world shipping and of
    the Government's thinking in trying to enter into the Far Eastern conference --
    as the Australian National Line was doing.
        The Prime Minister himself summed up the Opposition's motion —
    'If it has served its purpose, if it has served any purpose, I am
    convinced that it has not served the purpose of leading anyone to lose any
    confidence in what the government has done and is doing. But rather it
    may well have served the purpose of showing up in stark relief what little
    confidence can be placed in an opposition and a Leader of an Opposition who
    can present such a motion and support it in such a way.'

