<!--start metadata-->
Title: Politicians' salary increase
Description: press statement
Date: 19/04/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   STA.Ta; 'NV          April 19th,1959
MAL.:0144 FRASL,
                    INCRAA3e
         In the last two or throe weeks Federal politicians 
and the Federal Prliement has experienced an abnormal and unreasonable 
public criticism as a roeult of the Richardson Report. I ay abnormal 
and unreasonable because the moot vocal criticism has come from people 
who have not read the report or from people who have read various 
statements in the ;eetropolitan prese, several of which have been 
complete mierepresontetione of the facto.
         I am not going to detail these misrepresentations
in this statement. Â few days ago 1 wrote a letter to ru the local 
prase cencerning them. If there is anyone who would like more
details copies of the Richardson deport, which Wals not published in 
full in any of the preset are available I am prepared to discuss 
the Report with any person or group so long as they have read the 
Report first.
        I want to make it quite clear from the outset that
I support the recommendations made by the Richardson Committee as 
they were introduced into Rrliament, recommendetione which excluded 
certain things in the original Report such as non'contributory 
pensions for long service Ministers. I also support the method of 
making these changes.
        The recommendations of the Richard:on Committee 
can be divided into two main categorico; those concerning Ministers 
and those concerning Back-benchers,
        The Ministrs are the leaders of the greatest under-
taking in this country - the Government of Australia. Their 40PioionB 
collectively are more important than decizions of any other soup of 
people. Australians should not deny them a remuneration that is in 
keeping with their reeponsibilities tInd of the burdens of office which 
ell too often have aged men long Wore their time.
        When you consider the question of Back-benchere, it 
is quite true that members with some outside salary can undertake 
their work properly without jeopardieing or penalising themselves or 
their family. However, I am quite convinced that because of many

                                                     •
                           2
of the difficulties of a politician' life a member without any outside 
salary, rna this concerns a great number, is having great burdens 
placed upon hie family in an unreasonable manners I wonder how many 
people realise that for a great part of each year a politician' wife 
lives as a widow, and if that politician has a young yahoo' age family 
his children grow up knowing their Father almost as a stranger.
              If Parliament were composed of people who were all 
in the latter half of their lives, whose families have grown up and 
departed, then this kind of consideration would not apply, but there 
are many politicians with young families and, under present circum- 
stances, their family cannot help but suffer. Very often it is 
physically impossiblefor politicians to return home in the weakende, 
and they are absent from home for long periods. P...rliement sits for 
about six months a year and unless politicians oan mrke some arrange- 
ments to bring their family to Canberra for a short period their 
family life becomes pretty well non—existent because when a man 
returne to hie electorate in the P° rlismentt:ry recess he is not 
infrequently out at some function or attending to some e_:,_ectoral 
duty several days and nights a week. In country eleotorates it 
often means staying away from home. Members do not object to doing 
this, they willingly accept it as part of their functions, but there 
comes a stage when they do most strongly object to the penalties 
that are imposed upon their families.
              On Pace 12 of the Richardson Report a par:.graph 
of my own evidence to that Committee is published. I said:
              "One does not become a politician to make money
              or to become rich, but rather to serve, to tr- 
              to achieve objective that one feels are
              desirable and for the general good. I believe 
              this entails some sacrifice on the part of
              politicians. It is they who set the example 
              to the community they are meant to lead and 
              govern."
This is recognised by politicians e if the members of the public 
don't believe it.

                  3
         I think, in general terms, few people realise the 
very great expense involved in representing a country electorate. 
I have no intention of giving details of my expenses at this 
particules time, but I can assure you that the come to considerably 
more than the allowance that is made for these expenses, and my 
case is certainly not unique. This does mean again that if a member 
has no 1.2.tuide income ,I,ither his electoral duties or his oblieatione
toward hie family will be made to suffer. If any person doubts 
this I will give him privately details of electoral expenses. 
         There is one fin:A thing I want to eay. I
have voted againet this legislation in the Parliament mangpoommkkhom 
irsMilitelleffliNINERILIMMWORWENNEUEENUMFAMENERNOWNIV 
however, I know very well that this would have penalised a great 
number of members who have no wutside income, who are doing a good 
job and whose school age families are carrying the burden; I am not 
prepared to do this. 1 am convinced that there are many members 
from all Perties who do need the salary increases recommended by 
the Richardson Committees
         Previously I had felt that a permanent Committee 
composed of the Public Service Arbitrator, an Arbitration Court 
Judo and one other should be formed for the purpose. This has 
superficial attraction but, quite apart from the technical 
constitutional objection, there is another sound objection to this 
process. The salaries of these people are fixed directly by 
Parliament; if they were doing the job of fixing politicians' 
salaries they would be open to the Charge of getting a tit for 
tet" from Parliament. It would be a tragedy to draw these 
judicial people into this kind of argurent, I amid sooner preserve 
the present procedure under which politicians take full responeibility 
for their actions,

