<!--start metadata-->
Title: Economy, tariffs
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 16/04/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                                                                                                                         3HA Sunday, 16th April.
                       BROADCAST                                                                                                                                                         3YB Thursday, 20th April.
                                                                                                                                                                                         3LK Tuesday, 18th April.






                                                  With the Government's new taxation and other economic measures
                       and moves on the tariff review, last week was a good one for the 
                       nation, but particularly for our country areas.
                                                  First, the five per cent levy on personal income tax is being
                       cut to 22 per cent.                                                                Age, invalid and widows' and repatriation
  •                    service pensions are rising $1 a week for single people and $1.50 
                       for a married couple.
                                                  We have lifted the limits of pension eligibility so that 
                       single pensioners will be able to earn up to $46.50 a week and 
                       married people up to $81 a week and still benefit from the 
                       pension.
                                                  There are other rises in repatriation pensions and an easing
                       of tax impositions on profits and losses from ne sale of shares 
410                    held for 18 months or more.These are specific and immediate moves designed to increase 
                       consumption and to help those people on fixed incomes who have been 
                       the victims of recent price rises.
                                                  But of great longer term significance to Australia were the 
                       accompanying announcements by the Treasurer, Mr. Snedden. There 
                       has been considerable pressure over a period of time for a review
                       of the tax system in Australia.                                                                                                  The Government has been fully aware 
                       of this pressure and as a result a high level expert body will be 
                       appointed to inquire into the entire tax system.

   ~

             This will be no restricted inter-departmental investigation,
       but a full scale public inquiry, to which interested parties 
       from all sections of our community it is hoped will make submissions.
             To people such as us in country areas, the public nature 
       of this inquiry is most important because it will give rural 
       organisations the opportunity to put their case for the special 
       considerations that the primary sector must be given.
             Closely linked with these budgetary decisions was the 
       subsequent announcement by the Minister for Trade and Industry, 
       Mr. Anthony, aimed at speeding up the examination of tariffs in 
       Australia.
             The Tariff Board is being expanded from 9 to 11 members 
       as one measure aimed at speeding up the Board's progressive
       review. The Government expects to receive one particular report 
       from the Board by the end of this year.
             This will follow a request to the Board to examine and
       report on tariff items where the margins between general and 
       preferential rates of duty are greater than are required under our
•      preferential trade agreements, particularly with the U.K. 
             About a thousand items are expected to be covered in the 
       report which should be valuable for both domestic and international
       reasons. It will help the Government to assess the scope for early 
       action, to achieve cost savings in the domestic economy without 
       injuring Australian industry.
             Country people, of course, have been highly susceptible 
       to price rises, and some of the recent sharp increases have caused 
       great concern, both on the land and in country towns.
             Meetings and conferences of rural organisations have for a 
       long time now been sprinkled with complaints about prices charged
       by Australian manufacturers who supply the rural community with 
       their domestic and productive requirements.

                                 3.

              The Government's move over the tariff inquiry last week 
       will accelerate the investigation into claims that Australian 
       manufacturers are being unduly protected by tariffs, one of the 
       main complaints of people in rural areas.
              While the Government last week was acting to stimulate 
       the consumer area of the economy and to achieve cost savings in 
       the domestic economy through the tariff board inquiry, a series of 
       important recommendations from the Liberal Party's Federal Rural
•      Committee were released.
              The Committee, of which I have been a member, reported to
       the Party's Joint Standing Committee on federal policy, which 
       approved some key recommendations to be forwarded to the Government
       for its consideration. The Committee recommended, among other 
       things, that farmers be provided with long term finance to enable 
       those with reasonable records of operation, but with excessive 
       short term debts, to restructure those debts and avoid crippling 
       high interest and capital repayments.
              It also recommended the establishment of a Rural Loan 
       Insurance Corporation which would guarantee long term loans to 
       primary producers, and the establishment of a Rural Industries 
       Board which would give independent expert advice to Government.
              The Liberal committee concerned itself in some detail with 
       the Wool Industry, recommending that the Government should encourage 
       present tren6.s towards the revision of current selling procedures 
       using core testing and sale by sample and description.
              The Committee made the point, already fully realised by the 
       Government, that special preferential tariff treatment now favouring 
       the United Kingdom should be used as a bargaining point to gain 
       satisfactory guarantees of access for Australian experts of primary 
       industries when Britain entered the Common Market.

 r.
                4.
       These and other recommendations will naturally receive 
    the Government's fullest attention and taken into account in the 
    determination of Government policy.





•








i

