<!--start metadata-->
Title: Ghana - new dominion
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 28/04/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                       Sunday - 28th April, 1957 3A 
                                       Wednesday - 1st May, 1957 5Yi3

                      Crlifes,'A NLW DOMINION
                By: Malcolm Fraser, Memb-r for Wannon
4

          The most malicious lie of recent years is one that touches

the very heart of the British Comaonwealthof Nations and, more 

intimately, the United Kingdom itself. We have often heard the 

Communists from Russia or her satellites, or even, unfortunately, 

at times, misguided people inside Australia saying that England 

is u great imperial power deliberately keepine subject peoples under

 thecontrol of its Colonial office.

          This etatemaat, often repeated, has, unfortunately, been 

 believed by some people* It could ndt, however, be further from the
 truth. It could not be more completely and utterly felse. These 

 are the facts.

          Since the war, tee United kingdom has given self-government 

 tVcoloey fitter colony - India, iekietan, Ceylon, Rhodesia - in teis year, 

 Chena, formerly the Cold Coast of Africa - and plans are well advanced 

 to hive the Federation of Malaya its full independence very shortly. 

 This is no accident. It has not come abut by chance. It has been the 

 purpose and the object of what has been celled British Colonialism, to 

 teeeh people the art of self-governLent eothet they may look after their 

 awn affairs and guide their national destinies. This is not something 

 teat is taught lightly or in the space of a few short pears*

          The former colonies that have becose Dominions - full partners 

 in the great British Commonwealth of Nations, have rattle their transition 

 to self-government, on the whole, smoothly and without any untoward 

 incident. The Federation of Malaya is, perhaps, an exception to this 

 but Malaya is a special circumstance. It was occupied during t1 last 

 war and the Communiat subversives who now fight there were trained 

 during the war and as the Japanese retreated, they were left behind.

          Britain has granted self-government to over six hundred 

 million people since the end of the last war. Surely this fact 

 end the ever-growing number of Dominion partners in the Commonwealth of 

 Nations throw the lie right back in the facie of people who say that 

 Britain is a Colonial power wishing to keep Colonial peoples under her

 own rule.

 __  Ghana, the 1ateet ode tion to the Commonwealth family hes
o•come many difficullos in reaching Dominion status. Nevertheless, 
it still obviously ices problems as has ever; oountry of the world but 
theses will bu tackled in the future. Australia was represented by our 
 Ulster for Sir, Lr. Osborne, at the ceremony which marked the
beginnins of the new D041111.011. The Duchess of Kent represented the 
sueen who was recognised as the . ueen of Minna. It ease moet important 
 event in the history of Chang, a new Dominion, but it is also an important 
 and si ,nifinant event for the rent of the Commonwealth. It could well 
 be even more significant in the at times turbulent history of Africa. 
 The example of Ghana will, we hope, in the right time be followed by 
 other additions to the Commonwealth from that great Continent.
     the people who say that Englund is still the power behind 
 the colonies are, in feet, themselves the greatest imperie:.listB cf all 
 times. While England has granted six hundred million people self-rule, 
 Russia has denied six hundred eillion people the freedom they once had. 
 And there is a marked difference between the activities of england 
 and Rusaie. Great Britain has taught to us the art of self-government, 
 the art of democracy, and when the time has been ripe, Great 3ritein has 
 gently retired from the scene. kussie, on the other hand, has enslaved 
 many millions of people in all the countries of Eastern ::crape, people 
 who were highly civilised, who had self -govern mn t, who knew freedom and 
 woo have now been enslaved by hessian barbarism.
      It would be better for Os all if we remembered these feats. 
 io ,°.uetrelinn, whatever his political party, should be deceived bÿ 
 the intentions of Lngland or by the intentions of Russia. Dngland 
 has given to many countries of túo world the greatest possession 
 they have - their own freedom and their own self -government.
  ussia is doing everything it can to take freedom from the people, 
 to rob .thee. of their self-government. Let us remember this story 
 when we heur the subject mentioned in the future, as I am quite
 sure it will be.

 24/4/19B7.

