<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor Government, Anzac day
Description: Broadcast
Date: 29/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                    SUNDAY, 29TH APRIL 3HA 
RADIO BROADCAST                     WEDNESDAY, 2ND MAY 3LK
                                    THURSDAY, 3RD MAY 3YB






A great deal has been happening in this political year. I'd 
like to say something briefly about two particular matters, and 
then mention Anzac Day.


In this next week of the Parliamentary Sitting, a Bill is being 
brought forward by Government members concerning abortion on 
request or abortion on demand. Long before the last election, 
T made my own views plainly known. I'll be opposing this
measure, I'd oppose any other measure like it. I believe that 
abortion on request or abortion on demand would strike at 
traditional family values which are important to maintain 
in Australia or in any society. I believe that this measure 
brought forward by Government members has offended a very large 
number of people in Australia and I hope that the measure will 
be defeated.


I plan to be in Western Victoria supporting State candidates 
during that particular week for the State elections. I still 
hope to do this, but if the measure comes up for debate and for 
voting, I will certainly be in Canberra to register my vote 
against it.

In this next Victorian election, 18 year olds will have the 
vote for the first time. I applaud this. I wish we had granted 
the 18 year olds the vote before the last Federal election. 
I believe 18 year olds have earned their right to vote at 
elections because of their general concern which they have amply 
demonstrated to the nature of the society in which they live. 
I believe they have shown a greater concern than men and women 
of my generation showed or of older generations. They are 
concerned at the disadvantages of the under privileged that they 
should be given greater opportunities, be given greater assistance. 
They are concerned for justice, for equality, for equality of 
opportunity. Their concern is not only of domestic matters, 
but stretches through international events. They have earned 
their right to vote and they have it.


Last week we celebrated Anzac Day, perhaps the proudest day 
in Australian history, when we remember with pride men who 
fought in Gallipoli, in the trenches of the Western front, 
in the sands of the desert in two World Wars, in New Guinea, 
the Peninsula, in South-East Asia, in Korea. Over all of these 
battle-fields and many others, the Australian flag was flown 
proudly and Australians have fought proudly.


In the old terminology, Australians fought for God, for Queen 
and for country, but I think if these words were analysed, it 
really means the people fought for the right to choose the kind 
of society in which they wanted to live. People fought for 
the right to determine their own government, for a right of choice. 
They fought for their families, for their wives, for their

                   - 2 -





children. They fought for a better society. I believe that 
those who did not fight can only repay the everlasting and 
enduring deaths to those who did, and especially who gave 
the supreme sacrifice, by doing what they can to achieve a 
world in which the necessity for that kind of sacrifice does 
not arise again. I believe that men who had endured the 
difficulties of battle would all at some time say to 
themselves, "I hope that we can establish a world in which 
my son does not have to endure what I have endured". I 
wish it were possible to say with honesty and without 
equivocation that thatkind of world was in sight, capable 
of achievement. At the moment I do not believe that this 
is so.

Much of the free world as we know it is in retreat. The 
United States' President struggles to maintain a world 
role for a nation that wants to be concerned only with 
domestic problems, only with domestic difficulties. It 
doesn't much matter now what the causes are of this change 
of heart in the United States - it's a political reality, 
a political fact. The United States is moving quite rapidly 
towards isolationism.

The United Kingdom has entered the European Economic Community 
and will inevitably bedome more and more enmeshedwith the 
affairs of that Community. Her world role will also diminish. 
Russia remains a great predatory pwoer with the most powerful 
Navy in the world, with I believe the most powerful armaments 
in the world. Japan is trusting in economic terms and China 
remains the great imponderable. It ought to be noted that 
many years ago, China set herself many objectives. She has 
already achieved many of them, and she has not made one 
concession from her own point of view. She has shown patiende, 
determination and"strength.

So while the free world that we know - Europe, but in 
particular the United Kingdom and the United States - is in 
many ways in retreat in international diplomacy, there are 
other countries trusting us, seeking to exert a greater 
interest. I do not believe that this bodes well for Australia. 
I am certain that it will place upon us a requirement for a 
greater independence, for a greater independent strength. 
It is going to make it much harder to repay the debt we owe 
to those who did fight in the course of freedom.

