<!--start metadata-->
Title: Means test
Description: press statement
Date: 22/08/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


- PRESS STATEMENT             August 2.2nd,1960.
                                     4
  MALCOLM FRASER:



         Generally, after the Budget, I talk about the broad out-

  line in principle first, and in later talk, describe the details of

  the Budget. This year, in one respect, I am going to reverse this

  procedure. There have been changes made in the Means Test and as these

  are intimate and personally concern a great number of people, I feel that

  they may like to know about them first.

         The recent Budget has made a notable*advance in the Social

  Services field with particular regard to the Means Test. I am

  particularly happy to be able to report that this is so because the

  matter has interested many back benchers for a Deng time and the

  Government has clearly been influenced by their views.

          Previously, many back benchers had been disturbed by

  the injustice of the property Means Test. Under this Means Test, any

  person who had property (excluding a home and the things contained in

  it, and a car) to the value of £2,250 or more, would get no pension at all*

          Since a person would need more than £4,500 invested in

  Commonwealth Bonds to get an income equal to the pension, it was clear

  that there were many people who could get no pension but who, so far

  as immediate income was concerned, were much worse off than a pensioner

  on the full income. For instance, a person with £2,250 invested in

  Commonwealth Bonds at g$ would get only slightly more than A00 income

 but no pension.

         A person with £4,000 invested would get about £200 a year

  income — still a good deal less than the full pension.

         Under this arrangement, there was no incentive to save


 and many private members felt that this was a clear injustice to the 

 people concerned.

         Under the new arrangement, the income Means Test and the 

 Property Means Test h eve been merged* The injustice present in the old 

 system has been abolished. Under the new system, many people will 

 qualify for larger pensions than they now get and further, many more 

 with property in excess of £2,251 will qualify for a part pension fox 

 thefirst time. Indeed, some pension will be payable if a person has


 up to £4,600 #roperty jrovided he has no other outside income.

                                     2   smit
                The income from property is excluded in these calculations., 
 Furthermore, ownership of your own home and everything in it, and a car, 
 is also excluded for Means Test purposes. This, of course, is a 
 continuation of the present procedure.
                The system is too complicated to explain briefly but I 
 am convinced it is a just one. Quite naturally, every person who is 
 getting a part pension at the present time will want to make application 
 to the Social Services Department to have his pension reviewed. Any 
 person who has been refused a pension because of the old property Means 
 Test, which was limited to £2,250, should also make an application to 
the Department.
               A person is qualified for some pension if his income is 
 not more than about £400 and so long as that person has not more than 
£200 property. This is the same as the old arrangement. The significant 
point is that a pension is now payable on a sliding scale to a single 
person who bas up to £4,620 capital, and a married couple up to £9,240 
which are the cut—out points. At these upper limits there can be no 
other income. If a person has a small income, say up to £150, some 
pension is still payable to those with property of a value over £2,250,
which is the present cut—out point for a single person. Perhaps   I
can give one or two examples.
               If a person has £2,700 property, under the present arrange— 
ment there would be no pension. Under the new arrangement, if a   person 
has no other income £192 pension would be payable. If he has £50  income, 
£142 pension would be payable. If he has £100 income £92 pension  would
be payable.
               If a person has £3,700 capital under the present arrange- 
ment no pension is payable. Under the new arrangement, if he has no 
other income, £92 pension will be payable. If he has £50 income, £42 
pension will be payable.
               The system is worked out on a sliding scale of income and 
property. It is therefore necessary to know these two things before 
being able to say what pension may be payable to any one person.
               Age, invalid and widow's pensions are all calculated on 
the same basis except for the class "A" widow, i.e, a widow with one

•                  3 11.

    or rore children under 16 years of age, when the basis is even more
    favourable.
          If there is any doubt is any person's mind as to whether 
    they should apply or nott the best thing to do is to speak with the 
    local Social Services Officer to make sure, or if you prefer it, 
    and would like to write to me giving me details of your case, I 
    will make enquiries for you. There are obviously going to be 
    many thousands of people who will need their cases investigated 
    under the new system, and because of the tremendous task imposed 
    by this, it will not be possible for this new system to operate 
    before March of next year.

