<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool marketing
Description: press statement
Date: 8/03/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT                                                  March 8th, 1960.

                                 WOOL MARKETING
        For several years, the major wool growing organisations have argued about
the method of selling wool.   In short, one side has fought for some sort of reserve 
or floor price scheme as a safeguard against alleged exploitation of the market by
buying interests.   The other has been determined to maintain the present system 
with only minor changes.
        The two groups are as far now as they ever were from agreement. It is not 
a good thing for the industry to be divided in this way, especially at a time when falling
prices and rising costs have pretty well taken the profits out of wool growing. It 
gravely weakens the industry in any approach it may want to make to the Commonwealth 
Government because the Government says, quite properly, that it will not consider 
major changes in the industry unless it is convinced that all grower organisations 
want those changes.
        In maintaining this policy, the Government no doubt has in mind the manner in 
which it was led up the garden path before the wool growers' referendum of eight 
years ago.
        All this means that unless the industry organisations can make a united 
apporach on important issues, then nothing will be done about them.
        It is true that the Australian Wool Growers' Council, the Australian Wool and 
Meat Producers' Federation and the Australian Primary Producers' Union, have all 
made studies of the auction system and of suggested alternatives or modifications.
        However, no matter how good these studies may be they have been made by 
people who were committed to a point of view before the study was made.
        For this reason, these various reports put out by the organisations have
convinced few who did not support that point of view beforehand.  These reports 
have left the industry heavily divided on marketing issues.
        Under present circumstances, those who oppose a major change in marketing 
could well be holding the thin end of the stick for the simple reason that they are 
opposing a change to a reserve price scheme by saying "Leave things as they are". 
This is not an attractive argument at times when growers are getting highly unsatis- 
factory prices.
        For the past two years, a group of private Government Members have been 
trying to inform themselves on the problems confronting Australia's wool industry.
        This group has spoken to the Grower organisations, the Australian Wool 
Bureau, to buyers and sellers, manufacturers and retailers.                   1.2

                                         2.
       So far as the question of marketing is concernéd, our investigations have 
shown that the whole problem is a difficult one and much more complicated than 
sometimes made out.
       As a result of these investigations, it is my personal belief that a reserve 
price scheme could be worked without Government control.
       But I consider myself ill-equipped to say whether or not such a scheme could 
bring any long term benefits to the grower. Without benefits such as a higher 
average price and greater stability, then a scheme is useless. Reports by various 
grower organisations have left me confused on this issue as they are too contradictory.
       Many farmers are, like myself, probably confused about the issues concerned.
       There is danger that next time prices fall to unreasonably low levels, as 
they probably will whenever economic conditions overseas are upset, a referendum
in one way or another might be forced upon the wool industry. Under conditions 
of economic hardship, it would be impossible for the industry to make a considered
judgment.   I am not in any way opposed to a referendum on the marketing issue 
if the industry wants it, but I am opposed to a referendum that is held without proper 
investigations beforehand and that is carried out at a period of extremely low prices 
when people's emotions are unduly aroused.
       Such a referendum would certainly record a majority against the present 
auction system but would that necessarily mean a majority in favour of a floor 
price scheme?
       In other words, growers would know what they were voting against but would 
they know what they were voting for?
       This situation need not arise.  There is a way to get to the bottom of the
marketing question and„ at the same time, destroy the cancer that is dividing the
wool industry against itself. The industry as a whole should use the present period 
of relative calm to ask the Government to have made a full and impartial examination
of marketing problems,    Even though the organisations have made their investigations 
in the past, these have been regarded as partial by many and, in addition, there are
some things which have just not been examined.    I name one:
       During periods of low prices, we know that manufacturers are reducing stcoks
and the public is consuming less wool.  We also know that all the Australian wool is
sold at a price.  We do not know if this wool is sold to speculators who resell the
wool at a profit at some later time. If this is what happens, then this is a powerful 
argument in favour of a floor price scheme.
       This is one of the many things that needs close examination.
       The industry itself could not make an examination that would be regarded as
                                                                              %3

•                                             3,
    impartial because all industry members have, over the years, become tainted with 
    the point of view that their organisation has adopted.
            The only way is for the organisations to make a united approach to the 
    Government to ask the Government to appoint a Committee of Inquiry to examine
    these problems on the widest possible terms,    This inquiry would not commit the
    Government to subsequent action.     It would rather be a service to the wool industry.
            A Committee of this kind should try not to make recommendations. It should 
    get out the facts as it sees them and then hand its report back to the industry and the 
    industry organisations in a form that could be read by every individual wool grower.
            The point can be illustrated in this way:
            The Committee would examine floor price schemes.      It would set out altern-
    ative possible methods of finance,   It would explain what the advantages and dis-
    advantages may be,     It would not make the decision - "There will or will not be 
    a scheme" for the industry itself would decide that.
            The organisations would no doubt make their comments on this report and
    pass them along to their own members.     If this work were done, the individual 
    members of the industry would be in a position to make a considered judgment about 
    their own future.
            At the present time, I believe few of them are, because what basis have the 
    growers got for judging between the rival claims of the organisations?
            After this work is completed, a referendum of growers should be held if there
    are issues that clearly require the growers' decision.  A referendum under these 
    circumstances would be based on fact and sound judgment, whereas a referendum 
    forced on the industry at a time of extremely low prices would result in a decision
    based more on anger and emotions.      Therefore it is important that this work should 
    be done during this period of relative calm when emotions are not aroused as they 
    have been in the past.
            To illustrate the scope of the work that I have suggested, I think it could take
    six months to get the right people on to a Committee of this kind. If five or seven 
    members spent their full time on this, aided of course by the resources of the 
    Government and small permanent staff, the inquiry, I would think, would take at
    least six months and possibly longer.   This would not be a waste of time if the 
    right answer came out of the Committee's work, as I believe it would.
            It is worth remembering the organisations have spent several years arguing 
    among themselves and got nowhere.
            An impartial inquiry, conducted under the auspices of the Government, is the 
    only way to lead the wool industry out of its internal conflict and, at the same time, 
    solve the acute marketing problems to the benefit of the industry.

