<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool sales
Description: press statement
Date: 29/01/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRESS STATEMENT:



                                                            January 29th,1963


                  State: .zt issued by Malcolm Fraser as leader of the Wool- 

                  growers' deputation. Other members of the deputation are:


                                       R. McClure
                                       D. Cameron
                                       C. Rochfort 
                                       R. Malseed


      1. The Woolgrowers' deputation met at Nareen today to discuss the latest moves 

          in the Portland issue and to consider further action.


      2. The deputation welcomes the decision of the National Council of Wool Selling 
          Brokers to allot sale dates to Portland within the national roster for the 

          1963/64 season. Even if some of the members of the National Council of 
          Wool Selling Brokers still have reservations about Portland the Council has

          shown a willingness to accept the report. This is welcome.


      3. The deputation deplores the decision of the buyers to maintain their previous 

          stand despite the report; despite the wishes of the growers - as illustrated 
          by State and Federal policy of the organizations ( the Australian Woolgrowers' 

          and Graziers' Council, the Australian Wool and Neat Producers' Federation 
•         and the Australian Primary Producers' Union) - and despite the changed 
          attitude of woolselling brokers.


      4. The deputation regards Professor Cochrane's report as an arbitration decision 

          and believes that all parties should comply with the decision -no one party 
          should be allowed to thwart the wishes and intentions of the rest of the 

          industry. The deputation hopes the Victorian and South Australian Wool 
          Buyers' Association will recognise this when it reconsiders the matter - as 
          Mr. Lempriere has indicated it is going to do.


          The deputation strongly supports recent moves of the Victorian Wheat and 
          Woolgrowers' Association and the Victorian Graziers' Association in asking 

          the Premier to call a meeting with the Victorian and South Australian 
          Woolbuyers.


      6. The deputation is writing to the Premier and Organizations indicating support 
          for this move.



      7. The deputation hopes it will be successful and that the buyers will
•          recognise that a particular interest cannot stand in the way of the industry 
           as a whole. In this matter Professor Cochrane's report has been unequivocal 

           and clear cut - Portland should be supported.


      S. The deputation notes that experience of the last abortive attempt to hold a 
          sale shows that a successful sale requires two things which were lacking on. 
          the previous occasion -



          (1) Inclusion in the national roster for selling dates - which has been 

              agreed to for the future.


          (2) The willing support of sufficient buyers to make adequate competition. 
              This will require the lifting of the buyers' ban. This is the one 

              thing that is now holding up the smooth development of Portland as a 

              wool selling centre.



      9. The deputation recognises that individual buyers cannot be forced to attend 
          Portland sales but points out that individual buyers who may want to go to 
         Portland should not be compelled to stay away by their Association. This 
          is the point at issue.


     10. If the discussions that the Grower Organizations have asked for are not 
         successful this deputation will have positive proposals to put to the 
         Grower Organizations and to the State Government.

