<!--start metadata-->
Title: Conflicting duties of a federal member
Description: radio talk
Date: 24/03/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                 C 1J+N LEMELiJ V liELVIC A i` UDERPL NSWIli 
•                                             By: Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.0.01111.1warr 
                                                              In this initial article I want to tell you something of 
                     ay ova movements and how I believe I can best serve you tale electoes 
                     of Wannon as your Federal Member.
                                                              Last year I started cf r in the first «session leaving 
                     my home on Monday .morning, coming into the oaf fide in Melbourne, 
                     flying up to Canberra on Tuesday morning, flying; back from Canberra
                     on Friday morning, spending a few hours in the orrice in Melbourne
                     and thon motoring beck to Wannon to attend soma function on the 
                     Friday night and very often on the Saturday as well. Quite 
                     frsukly, it is not possible tc keep up this schedule rid at the
                     same time make any real contribution to the government of the
                     country.
                                                              Let us have a look at the hours and see how they
                    were spent. Noreen is five hours from Melbourne by car if I go
                     direst with no stops end making no calls on the way. If I go out
                     ad my way to attend some function it can hardly mean a journey
                     of leas than 280 or 300 miles end, in addition to this, I must
                      stop on the way which makes the journey a very long one.
                                                              During the Session last year I was spending; seldom
                      less than 14 hours n we behind the wheel of cry car and four
                      hojre a week in aeroplanes. I would spennd 6 hours 14 my office
                      in Melbourne divided between Monday and Friday.
                                                               In Canberra itself we arrive on Tuesday at lunch
                      time and the House sits from 2.16 until 11 o'clock.
                                                               On Wednesday there are Party meetings from 10 in the
                      morning until 12.30 and the House meets again from. 2.15 until
                      11.30 at night with the usual 2 hours off for dinner between 6 and
                      8. On Thursday the House meets at 10.30 to 12.30, from 2.15 to 6
                      and 8 to U - making a total of about 22 hours each week. Travell-
                      ing time, time spent in my office in Melbourne and time when the
                      House was sitting through last year were accounting for 46 hours
                      in each week which is slightly more than an average working week.

                                   a
             However, a politician's work is not finished with 
these duties. If any real contribution is to be made to the debates 
of the House or to the great and important problems confronting 
the development of this country and to the social questions which 
continually arise in a c1uizIu and dynmaic society then a great 
deal of research and reading must be done. In addition to this, 
there are iarliamentary Committees which mmet outside the time 
in which the house is sitting and which extend the working period 
for Members by many hours.
             I am not writing this to try and say that Members of 
Parliament are over-worked, Jut these is a definite limit to the 
amount of work that any parson can do in any one week - to put it 
this way, the mace time I spend attending functions in the 
electorate, the lasa tiae I spend in research and in reading which 
are the necessary part of the life of any politician. The more 
time I spend in research in preparation for some debate, the less
time I can spend in this great electorate o           nnon. It ia
sometimes thought that it is merely the work in the electorate 
that brings a Member support in future elections. IL is Lay 
with not to merely hold this seat but to make some positive con- 
tribution, in the future, to the government of this country in a way 
which may be of lasting benefit to every section of the community. 
If I can do that, it will 11-= of lasting benefit to every person in 
Wannon. I believe that you, the electors of Wanon, will appreciate 
 this and will realise that it musOof necessity place some limit 
 on the amount of time that I can get about this electorate. Already 
 I have had to refuse several invitations because I am on d Committee 
 that is meeting over the week-ends o the k2nd and 29th. I hope 
 the people who ask me to attend these functions will undersi.end and 
 that it will not deter people from asking me on future occasions.
             I have decided, where possible, when the House is sitting 
 to spend as much time as I can on the larliamentary side of my duties 
 in study and in research - without which a reasoned view Oa any 
 problem is not possible. To do this, will mean that Iwill stay in

•


    Canberra throughout this Session unless some important Danetion 
    maker, it necessary for me to return to Wannoue
           When the Hobe is not in 4ession, I will be getting 
    about the electorate as much as I possibly can, attend in to the 
    other and vital half of a politician's job, which is keeping in 
    close touch with the people he represents.
           While I am in Canberra, as always I will be available 
    to attend to the needs and to the problems of the people in this 
    area. In fact from Canberra, if you get in touch with me I 
    can very often contact the .:Asters more quickly end jet a 
    quicker mime to your problems than it I am coming back to 
    Fannon each week-end.
           I have placed these thoughts squarely before you
    because I believe this problem of the trio duties of a Federal 
    Member, when the distance that ;cast be travelled is great, is a 
    difficult one to solve. I believe the plan of action, together 
    with the esIlsitaxat definition of functions, which I have
    tried to set out in t is article is the best one to make it 
    poscible for na to serve you the people of 'Actnnon and through 
    you, Our Australia.
                     ao........ormwoorowsl^ • •Nlixo.M.M.11^41..•


    19th March, 7.

