<!--start metadata-->
Title: Economic enquiry and the farmer
Description: press statement
Date: 11/11/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT:

 MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                       November 11th, 1962

                      ECONOMIC ENQUIRY AND THE FARMER


          A couple of weeks ago the Prime Minister announced that there was 
 going to be an enquiry into the Australian economy. This enquiry is 
 going to be a very high-powered affair and will probably take a consider- 
 able time. You have only to read the terms of reference to realise that 
 its report could have a tremendous impact on the future pattern of
 Australian development,

          The Committee will be required to enquire into the trends in 
 population and in the work force; the availability of basic physical resources; 
 the growth of savings; overseas investment in Australia and its significance 
 to the Australian economy; .6he likely pattern of growth and the geographical 
 distribution of industry - primary, secondary and tertiary; the consequences 
 of this for the occupational pattern of the work force; the questions involved 
 in the production in Australia of goods that would otherwise be imported; the 
 development of production for export and the securing of adequate export out- 
 lets and, finally, the effect of customs tariff and other forms of either 
 direct or indirect protection.

          The Committee has been asked to enquire into all these things, bearing 
 in mind at all times the Government's objectives of a high rate of economic 
 and population growth together with full employment and rising standards of 
 living and stability of costs and prices.

          This is obviously a tremendous task and the Committee will require 
 a considerable Secretariat to enable it to get this work done within a 
 reasonable time. This enquiry has been instituted because several sections 
 of the community have been dissatisfied with certain aspects of policy, 
 particularly with tariff policy. For example, the manufacturers always say 
 that tariffs are not high enough while the farmers and the exporters tend 
 to say that tariffs are too high because if we didn't have them we would 
 be able to buy the things that go into our costs of production much more 
 cheaply than we can with tariffs. For different reasons, therefore, these
 two sections have wanted an enquiry into tariffs. However, the Government 
 felt that a narrow enquiry into tariffs alone would not serve as useful a 
 function as the wider but still restricted enquiry which is going to be held.

         The Government hopes that a blue print will be drawn up of our 
 economic potential - a blue print that will show the extent of our resources 
 and our capabilities but one which will also point out any limitation that 
 there may be in those resources.

         There are certain sections in the terms of reference which should be 
 of particular interest to people who live outside the capital cities, sections 
 that will concern not only the farmer and agriculturist but also the people 
 who live in the large towns like Hamilton, Warrnanbool, Portland and Casterton. 
For example, there is the reference to enquire into the pattern of growth 
 and the geographical distribution_ of industry - primary, secondary and
 tertiary, and the consequences that this will .have on the occupational pattern 
of the work force. These terms seem to open up the whole question of 
 decentralization and are of significance to Australia.

         The reference which requires the Committee to examine the matters 
involved in the production in Australia of goods that would otherwise be
imported is a most important one to all primary producers. It is the farmer



                                                                       /2.

r




                                          -   2


     who generally finds that without a tariff he would be able to buy an article 
     that is a part of his cost of production more cheaply than he can with the 
     tariff, and the consequences of this policy on the farmer's costs and on his 
     ultimate competitive position in world markets could be examined in detail 
     under this reference. The farmer, however, should not think that the 
     protection of Australian industry which raises the costs of some of the items 
     that form a part of his costs of production is just a one-way street to his 
     own disadvantage. The increased work force that results from this kind of 
     tariff does create a large market for much of our primary produce, and this 
     is to the farmer's advantage.

               The specific reference to enquire into the effect of customs tariffs 
     and other forms of protection is something which the farming communities have 
     been pressing for a very long while. Their energies in this direction were 
     brought to a head by the Government's announcement to enable the Tariff
     Board to use quantitative restrictions in cases where the Tariff Board believes
     that tariffs or subsidies are not appropriate.            In the autumn session there 
     were some of us who pressed the Government not to give: the Tariff Board power 
     to use quantitative restrictions on a permanent basis until a full scale
     enquiry had beer. instituted.        As a result of this pressure that was spear- 
     headed by Bert Kelly from South Australia and supported by myself and others, 
     a compromise has been reached. The Tariff Board has been given power to
     use quantitative restrictions, but a strictly limited power.              It can only 
     use them where other means of protection are inappropriate and when it does 
     use quantitative restrictions it has to put down a time limit which may be 
     a certain number of years or months. Quantitative restrictions cannot go 
     on forever into the future. This time limit would compel the matter to be 
     reviewed at certain intervals.

               In addition to these restrictions on the use of quantitative 
     restrictions, the Government has, of course, announced that the enquiry 
     which has been pressed for so widely, is to be held.

               Those of us who opposed the use of quantitative restrictions did so 
     because we believed that they tend to raise costs inside Australia more than 
     the traditional means of protection, that is, more than the tariff, and since 
     primary industries have been facing difficult cost price positions for some 
     time, anything that might tend to raise their costs even further would not be 
     acceptable.

               However, since this enquiry has been announced, we will discover 
     whether or not we were right in our objections to the use of quantitative 
     restrictions and Government policy would, I am quite certain, be reviewed in 
     the light of this enquiry's decision.

               This enquiry is going to be of the greatest significance to all 
     sections of the Australian community. Organizations with ideas and views 
     that they want to put forward should, I believe, start preparing their views 
     now because the Committee is going to be an extremely high-powered one and 
     any matter that is put forward will want to be most carefully prepared. 
     On the other hand, it will be important to the Committee's work to have the 
     views of important organizations in Australia such as the Chambers of 
     Manufactures, of Commerce and the various primary producer organizations 
     like the Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation, the Australian 
     Woolgrowers& and Graziers' Council and the Australian Primary Producers' 
     Union.

