<!--start metadata-->
Title: Dairy referendum, wheat delivery quotas, rehabilitation of war veterans
Description: Radio talk
Date: 7/03/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO TALK    Sunday, 7th March 1971 — 3HA
              Thursday, 11th March 1971 — 3YB


     This week I would like to talk with you about 
the dairy industry referendum.... wheat delivery quotas and a 
$1,000 art contest to help the rehabilitation of war veterans. 
DAIRY REFERENDUM
     I am pleased with the results of the dairy industry 
referendum in which Victorian dairy farmers voted overwhelmingly 
in favour of the Government implementing equalisation legislation.
     Figures available to me show that more than 24,000 
Victorian dairy farmers voted for implementation of the 
legislation and about 800 voted against it.
     The referendum simply asked dairy farmers if they 
were in favour of Commonwealth legislation being brought into 
operation to give statutory support to the existing voluntary 
price equalisation scheme.
     Legislation was passed by the Federal Parliament 
last June, but its implementation is conditional upon a
majority vote of eligible dairy farmers being in favour of this 
course.
     Compulsory equalisation for any particular dairy 
product will not be introduced unless there is a specific need 
created for it, sich as by withdrawal of an important manufacturer 
from the current voluntary equalisation scheme.
     This is one of the provisions contained in the Dairy 
Industry Levy Bill put to the nation wide referendum.

                      2 —

         The equalisation scheme, which has operated since 
1934, is based on a system of voluntary agreements between 
manufacturers and the Commonwealth Dairy Produce Equalisation 
Committee Limited.
         Broadly, the scheme is an annual pooling of local 
and export returns so that factories receive the same return 
for their butter, cheese and casein, regardless of the
market on which the product is sold.
         The stability which has resulted from this scheme 
has obviously been of great value to the industry.
         However, an inherent weakness is the scheme's 
dependence on the voluntary cooperation of manufacturers who 
might give notice of withdrawal at any time.
         Any appreciable withdrawal could result in a 
breakdown of the arrangements and result in price cutting
on the local market. This would lead to a complete loss of 
price stability f the domestic price would be forced down to 
the level of export parity.
         At the present time there are a number of small 
cheese companies that are not in the voluntary equalisation 
scheme, but their production is not sufficient to make non- 
participating a threat to the existing scheme.
         However, dairy industry leaders have been aware 
that the scheme could be quickly undermined by the withdrawal 
of even one major manufacturer.

                       3


          The Government agreed with the Australian Dairy 
Industry Council that the continuation of the equalisation 
scheme is necessary for orderly marketing and that the 
voluntary scheme requires statutory support to give a firmer 
foundation to the industry's organisation.
         The Government had also accepted the Dairy Industry 
Council's proposal for Federal legislation to provide a 
Commonwealth levy on production to finance equalisation payments 
as the mosj'practical means of achieving that result.
         The Government and the Dairy Industry Council 
believes that these changes will assist the industry and benefit 
the dairy farmer by preserving the dairy farmers level of 
return and maintaining stability.

WHEAT QUOTAS
         Wheat delivery quota proposals for 1971/72 put forward 
by the Australian Wheat Growers' Federation, and recently 
endorsed by each State have now been agreed to by the 
Commonwealth Government.
         The1971/72 quotas for all States will total 339— 
million bushels, including Durum wheat. Durum wheat is a new 
category in the quota system and has been included to enable 
the Wheat Board to meet market requirements for this macaroni— 
type wheat.

                           4 —

          The first advance on wheat included in the quot&
pool will be $1.10 per bushel, less freight.              r
          The Reserve Bank has agreed to make funds available 
from its rural credits department to enable the Wheat Board 
to pay the first advance and all pool expenses including 
freight, storage, handling charges and interest.
          The total amount required is estimated at $434 million
or $1.28 per bushel.   As is customary, the Commonwealth will 
act as guarantor for the Wheat Board.
          Over the past couple of months, the Wheat Board has 
drawn large sums to pay a first advance to growers for 1970/71 
pool wheat and its total indebtedness is very heavy.
          The Government, however, has agreed to again help the 
wheat industry in recognition of the pressing needs of many 
growers and their importance in the rural economy.
          The level of quotas will be 21 million bushels above 
those for the current season, and it was based on an assessment 
of possible export prospects which, if realised, will mean a 
substantial reduction in stocks at the end of the current 
season.
          Many growers have asked when further payments by the
Australian Wheat Board can be expected.   Within the next two 
weeks, the Board should complete repayments of money it borrowed
from the Government last year.   The Board will then be in a 
position to begin toaccumulate funds to make a second payment to 
growers on 1968/69 wheat.
          It might be possible to make such a payment about the 
middle of this year.

                    - 5

ART CONTEST
         An Australia-wide art contest, with prizes totalling 
$1,000 and aimed at helping the rehabilitation of war veterans 
will be held later this year.
         The contest will be open to all ex-servicemen and 
women, and those war widows receiving medical treatment through 
the Repatriation Department.
         It will also be open to TPI pensioners, Service 
pensioners and nurses of the 1914-18 War.
         The therapeutic value of art in rehabilitation has 
long been widely recognised and a similar contest held in 1968 
attracted more than 500 entries and many were judged as being 
of high standard.
          The prize money for this year's contest has been 
made available by the RSL, and in addition the Repatriation 
Commission has made available $1,000 for the purpose of acquiring 
works of art entered iithe contest.
          The contest this year will be divided into four 
 sections - oils, water colours, other media and sculpture. 
 Other media includes silver, smithing, jewellery, weaving and 
 tapestry.

          6

    One of Australia's leading artists, Sir William 
Dargie, has agreed to help organize the contest and will be 
one of the judges.
    The central juding will be held in Canberra, 
following an exhibition of successful entries in various 
States.
    Conditions of entry and application forms are 
available from the Repatriation Department in Melbourne.

