<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 27/08/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  3HA: Sunday, 27 August 
                  3YB: Thursday, 31 August 
BROADCAST         3LK: Wednesday, 30 August



    Much of the attention in the Press given to the 
Federal Budget has been directed towards taxation and social 
services provisions. And rightly so, because the budget 
contains significant changes in both these areas. In view 
of this, I would like to outline now some of the ways in which 
the rural community will benefit from the provisions of the 
budget. Payments to rural industry this year at $223 million 
are the second highest on record.


    The level of payments is down on last year's level 
mainly because of better wool prices and the generally 
improved confidence in the rural economy.


    Of course, wool growers have nothing to fear from 
the reduction in the Budgetary provisions for the
deficiency payments scheme because the Government has already 
given a firm undertaking to continue the scheme and to
maintain the wool deficiency payments at the support level of 
36 cents a pound.

    The Budget also provides $27 million for wool
research and promotion and $700,000 for the research, 
implementation and development of pre-sale objective measurement 
studies. There are also funds to cover the operations of the 
Australian Wool Commission, soon to be absorbed in the Australian 
Wool Marketing Corporation, and $4.2 million towards the cost 
of handling wool under the price averaging plan.


    Turning to wheat, the Government has allocated $47 
million for payments under the Wheat Stabilisation Scheme, 
ensuring that the scheme will operate most effectively this 
year.





                      .../2

                         - 2 -



              Besides the commitment to the wool and wheat industries 
       the Government has agreed to increase its expenditure on the 
       National campaign aimed at eradicating Tuberculocis and 
       Brucellosis from our cattle herds. I need hardly emphasise 
       the importance of this in the long term for the beef export 
       industry.


              For the dairy industry the Government has provided 
       extensive financial assistance totalling $33.3 million.


              This comprises $28.5 million under butter and 
       cheese bounties, $4 million for the marginal dairy farm re- 
•      construction scheme and $800,000 for the processed milk 
       products bounty.


              This assistance is expected to ensure the maintenance 
       of reasonable returns to dairy farmers throughout the new 
       financial year.


              In addition to the budgeted amounts the Government 
       has given an underwriting commitment to the industry which 
       has led to butter and cheese factories throughout Australia to 
       make opening pay rates of 34 cents a pound on a commercial 
       butter basis. This means that dairy farmers will enjoy the 
•      same guaranteed returns that they have for many years, with the 
       prospect of enhanced payments according to export market 
       opportunities.


              There are other areas in which the Government has 
       agreed to help primary industries. Many rural producers will 
       benefit from the Petroleum Product Prices Scheme $26,8 million 
       dollars (up more than $12 million), Phosphate Fertilizer
       Bounty Scheme $46 million (up more than $200,000)and, of course, 
       the Rural Re-construction Scheme $56 million (up nearly
       $15 million).





                                             .../3

                 3-


        In addition to all these measures is one of the 
    most forward thinking steps in terms of budgetary initiatives.

        This is the initial allocation of $20 million to 
    be used in facilitating increased availability to farmers of 
    long term loans.

        The Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair, has 
    said this should lead to the probable establishment of a 
    national rural balk. Explaining the scheme, Mr Sinclair said 
    the amount should not be seen as the total sum of money 
    ultimately to be available for longter m rural credit. He said 
    that top level discussions have already been held between the 
    Government and institutional lenders on a range of possibilities 
    and he hoped to be able to spell out more details shortly.

        The new proposals will certainly improve farmers' 
    access to credit and I believe will be of great long term 
    benefit throughout the rural sector.

        Finally, the Commonwealth has recognised again this 
    year the difficult problem of rural unemployment and has 
    allocated $72 million for relief grants in country areas.
•       At every level, the budget demonstrates a genuine 
    concern for country people, a contrast, I might add, to the 
    remarkably irresponsible statements last week by Mr Whitlam 
    which revealed a complete lack of understanding and regard 
    for the problems of rural Australia.

        The Leader of the Opposition said on the ABC news
    last week:

        "I am quite convinced that the Australian 
        dollar ought to be appreciated in value."



                            .../4

                -4




        His commitment to revalue the Australian dollar 
    will substantially reduce the incomes of primary producers 
    and seriously damage Australia's competitive position with 
    other countries.


        If Australia's currency is appreciated, the earning 
    capacity of our export industries is reduced and primary 
    producers would be among the first to suffer under such 
    circumstances.


        A revaluation of the Australian dollar is conceivable 
~   only in the most extreme circumstances of financial upheaval 
    internationally or of a critical internal situation. Neither 
    of these prevails at the moment.


        The Treasurer's recent budget is tailored to cater 
    for the present economic climate in Australia. To introduce 
    such an extreme measure now or in the near future would be to 
    upset the whole basis of the budget strategy.


        People must consider the naivete of an aspiring 
    Prime Minister who discloses months in advance of an election 
    date his plan to revalue the Australian dollar. His statement 
    only creates uncertainty and provokes speculation about the 
•   future value of Australia's currency.

