<!--start metadata-->
Title: Conservation, kangaroos
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 29/11/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   TEXT OF

   RADIO BROADCAST   31K MONDAY NOVEMBER 29 
                     3HA SUNDAY NOVEMBER 28 
                     3YB THURSDAY DECEMBER 2

   An awareness of the urgent need for conservation, both of our
   natural environment and resources, and of Australia's unique 
   native animals, now exists throughout the community.

   It is an awareness which, some experts say, has been late in 
   coming, but it is now a movement of great force which is being 
   recognised and encouraged by governments.

   As a foundation member of the Australian Conservation Foundation 
   it is a movement I am personally pleased to see.


   For a number of years there has been considerable conflict
•  over the question of one of our most common, but never the 
   less cherished, native animals, the kangaroo.

   It is for this reason that particular interest centres around 
   the tabling in the House of Representatives in the past few days 
   of one of the most comprehensive investigations ever conducted 
   into the kangaroo population...the Interim Report of the Select 
   Committee on Wildlife Conservation.

   This report, titled Conservation and Commercial Exploitation of
   Kangaroos, studies in great detail aspects of the kangaroo's 
   existence in all parts of Australia, with particular emphasis 
   on whether its existence is threatened by shooting and by rural 
   development.
•  Some of the report's conclusions are rather heartening in view 
   of the publicity given to statements that the kangaroo was in 
   danger of being wiped out.

   The Committee found for example that none of the larger species 
   was at present under threat of extinction, and considers that there 
   is no requirement for a total ban on commercial exploitation.

   It says that clearing of land and provision of watering points 
   and the introduction of stock has led to an overall increase in 
   the numbers of the larger species.

   However the Committee is of the opinion that rural development has 
   led to the extinction of some small species and the near extinction 
   of others. It warns that too little interest is shown in these
   smaller kangaroos.    .../2

2.
The Committee believes that in view of the scientific opinion that no 
large species is under threat of extinction, there is no immediate 
need for a nationwide closed season.
But it states that because of conflicting evidence concerning safe 
levels of harvesting, further research must be undertaken.
I have already asked the CSIRO if the report affects their research.
The report says that the only justification for a kangaroo
exploitation industry is that kangaroos are, at certain times and 
in some places, sufficiently numerous to be regarded as pests and 
that it is justifiable to permit reduction in their numbers. That 
is the view of the Committee.
At the present time it is estimated that more than five thousand 
people are engaged in all States except Tasmania, in harvesting 
kangaroos. Their investment in plant and equipment totals more 
than seven-million dollars.
Last year some eight hundred thousand kangaroo and wallaby skins, 
and 1.7 million lb. of kangaroo meat was exported from Australia.
The total value of these exports was nearly two million dollars. 
A much greater quantity was used in the local production of pet 
foods.
One of the reasons for complaints by tourists that they rarely see 
kangaroos in the bush was stated to be that the animals feed early 
in the morning and late in the afternoon, remaining under cover 
during the day.
The main species examined by the select committee are the Red Kangaroo, 
the Eastern and Western Grey Kangaroo, and the Euro.
Submissions were examined from more than 500 people and groups. 
Probably one of the most important points made by this report is in 
showing the lack of detailed knowledge surrounding the kangaroo.
This is summed up by the statement of Professor G. Sharman of 
Macquarie University who said, and I quote, "if any of the scientists 
have told you they are dealing with scientific facts in this whole 
 confused kangaroo situation, they are wrong. Nobody knows the facts".
At least the publication of this interim report which is available 
 from the Government Printer, or through my office at Parliament House,

       3.
       goes some of the way to collecting the facts needed to conserve 
       the kangaroo. I hope it will be studied closely by all associated 
       with conservation.
       The additional $30 million advanced to the Australian Wool Commission 
       to enable its continued activity on the auction floor will be welcomed 
       by wool growers as evidence of the Government's continued support 
       for this body.
       The activities of the Commission have, I feel certain, helped halt 
       the decline in wool prices. With this new advance, it will have a 
       purchasing power of $116 million.
       I note that at the recent Newcastle and Melbourne sales, demand has 
       improved and that only 16 per cent of the wool offered was purchased 
       by the Commission...the remainder going to the trade.
       It must be understood that the money advanced to the Wool Commission, 
       or used as a guarantee for loans for the Commission, are not a direct 
       cost on the taxpayer. The wool purchased does have a significant value 
       and when sold receipts will be returned to the Commonwealth. The 
       money advanced to the Commission is an advance against stock. It is 
       not a subsidy.
       On the other hand, the Wool Deficiency Payments are direct subsidies 
       to the wool grower. I am advised by the Department of Primary Industry 
       that the first cheques under this Scheme will be in the mail before
•      Christmas.
       The Payments cover the period from July this year and based on the 
       average deficiency at sales since then of about 21 per cent, the amount 
       allocated to date is approximately $20 million.
       It is apparent that the total commitment so far under both Schemes
       is likely to be more than $200 million'. Effective long-term
       planning is essential for the wool industry, but in the meantime 
       these two Schemes are of great help to all woolgrowers.

