<!--start metadata-->
Title: National Labour Advisory Council, unemployment, Terrigal Conference, Senator Murphy
Description: electorate radio talk
Date: 16/02/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m.
ELECTORAL RADIO TALK	
Sunday, 16th Feb..1975,
~	
.	
.	
...	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
`,
In the economic statement that was released a few days ago by the Opposition
there was a proposal for a revised statutory National Labour Advisory Coun- 
cilCoun-
cil. We intend to make this council a statutory body so that future Min- 
isters for Labour will not be able to be ignorant about it.
In our time it was the principal advisory body composed of employers and  
the A,C.T.U. and it gave advice to the Minister for Labour on a wide-
range of industrial questions.	
'
The story of industrial relations is very much the story of human rélation  
ships, It is important to keep avenues of communication open, not just  
when there is a crisis but on a regular basis so that people can get to
know and understand each other.	
When a crisis does arise there is 
,tea much greater opportunity of resolving it to everyone's advantage, esp.-  
ecially to the advantage of the general public.
Since the present Minister for Labour, Clyde Cameron, has been in power,  
the N.L.A.C. has not met once. I have had many people from the trade  
union movement and from employer organisations saying to me, "if you get  
back, will the N.L.A.C. be revived?"
We are certainly going to revive it, make it a statutory body and we will  
strengthen it. Its membership will basically be the same as the member- 
ship of the earlier body. But we would hope that the council itself
would want to establish industrial councils, each chaired by a member of,  
the N.L.A.C., so that more people could be drawn into the discussions con-
cerned with particular industries	
the metal trades, the distributive 
trades, export industries.
We would also hope that it will establish sub-committees for certain part-  
aeicular matters - communication, involvement, training, manpower planning,  
the problems induced by technological change, discrimination and matters  
of this kind.
If there was a wide-ranging network of discussions available and if the  
advice is all going to the Minister for Labour, we would have a greater  
chance of establishing a saner industrial climate. In industrial relations  
we need to place more emphasis on those things that ought to occur before  
a strike or dispute arises. So often people centre their criticism and  
comments, them efforts for reform, on what happens after a dispute arises.  
Our real objective ought to be to reduce the number of disputes as much as  
possible.
We can only do that if we are concerned with labour relations in the broad- 
est context, on a continuous basis before a dispute arises, Beth employees  
and employers can do a great deal to improve the situation.
THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER
National Labour Advisory Council


                                  2.
 In some industries there are good relationships. In others I have visited 
 the relationships seem to be bad and there is relatively little communica- 
 tion. If all Australian industries followed the practices of the best 
 Australian industries, our record of disputes' would be much less than it 
 has been in recent times.

 I feel very strongly about these matters and hope that on a return to 
 Government we will be able to do a great deal to reduce industrial disput- 
 ation as a result of our policies.

 The Parliament resumed last week after the summer recess. At the beginn- 
 ing of the summer there was a great deal of argument about the Prime 
 Minister's overseas visit, one of the longest visits overseas to a great 
 number of countries ever conducted by a Prime Minister.

 There are many people who believe that he ought not to have been away for 
 so long and some who think he ought not to be away at all because of the 
 grave domestic problems in Australia and those problems are serious.

 Unemployment 

 There are now over 312,000 people unemployed in Australia. 312,000 people 
 unable to gain jobs. That is the highest figure since the Great Depression. 
 Bob Hawke himself has said that if world events start to come in on top
 of the mistakes that have been made in Australia unemployment could go to 
 half a million and that indeed is tragic.

 Very often those of us who remain in work, those of us who are secure, 
 look upon the 300,000 as a statistic and do not realise the loss of morale 
 and dignity that is involved when a person wants to work but can't get a
 job. If a father can't get work, how does he explain that to his children. 
 The personal and family tragedy is great.

 I know very well that there are some people who abuse assistance, who seem 
 to prefer to take a chance rather than take a job. But I believe they are
;_he minority. The overwhelming majority of the 300,000 would really want 
 to get a job if a job was available.

 The present government ought to be condemned. There are 300,000 reasons 
 for this condemnation. We had a speech from the Prime Minister in Adel- 
 aide a short while ago in which he said in firm and categoric terms that 
 he can't blame overseas events, we have to blame high and excessive wage in- 
 creases in Australia. The Prime Minister could have done more over a much
 longer period to see that wage increases were not excessive if he had 
 wanted to.

 Terrigal Conference

 Towards the end of the summer we had the Terrigal conference of the Labor 
 Party. This has been nick-named the Terrigal Two-step because so.many of

 X. he policies of the government were torn up and reversed during that 3.
  particular week. There is a question to be asked by everyone in Australia 
  as a result of that conference. Does this really represent a change of 
  heart? Does the government now really believe,that private enterprise, 
  which employs 75% of the Australian workforce has a lasting and permanent, 
  place in the Australian economy? Or does theìgovernment look at this 
  merely as a tactical manoeuvre, recognising that if they did not bow in
  the direction of private enterprise, then the government's days are surely       ,
  numbered?


  I strongly believe that as far as the government is concerned thé bow in 
  the direction of private enterprise is merely a tactical move. Jim Cairns` 
  the Treasurer, realises that if he is to achieve his long term ambition. 
  for the complete socialisation of Australia he must co-operate with priv- 
  ate enterprise in the short term to see that private enterprise `whether
  it be a one-man company or business or a large corporation) can survive' 
 a bit longer.


 He knows there is no other way of restoring employment. Evidence for this 
 's seen by the fact that many of the government's policy changes are tem- 
 porary. The Capital Gains tax has been deferred for a year. The assist- 
 ance tó the motor industries is to last three months. The increased de-
 preciation allowance ends in June. 

 Senator Murphy 


 Next we had Senator Murphy's appointment to the High Court. This is an 
 extraordinary move. It is not the first time somebody from the Senate 
 has been appointed to the High Court, but it was unexpected and quite 
 unusual in view of the electoral situation which results.


 Next year there has to be a Senate election and in that Senate election 
 there are 16 Opposition Senators retiring and 14 Labour Senators retiring. 
 It is very difficult because of the weight of electoral numbers for us 
 to gain a majority of Senators from N.S.W. There are normally 5 Senators
   r election. It is probable that Labor would have won 3 and we would have 
 won 2. Because of Senator Murphy's elevation to the High Court, it now 
 seems there will be 6 Senators elected whenever the next Senate election 
 is held in N.S.W. and that Labor will win 3 and we will win 3.


This will virtually destroy Mr Whitlam's chance of gaining control of the 
Senate. Why therefore, has he done it?. He seems to have thrown away
an enormous technical advantage.


One of the theories running around Canberra this last week was that the 
Prime Minister is planning for a double dissolution before the end of June. 
The whole thing seems to be a mystery.- I don't believe that the Prime Min- 
ister would have given away that tactical advantage without some correspon-
ding benefit to the longer term life of his government. Few can see that, 
benefit..

