<!--start metadata-->
Title: Malaysia - Singapore: Defence plans
Description: press statement
Date: 3/03/1969
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


,I.



     PRESS STATEMENT
     by Mr Malcolm Fraser, Minister for Education and Science 
     and Member for Wannon

     MALAYSIA—SINGAPORE: THE GOVERNMENT'S DEFENCE PLANS


       The Government, believing that Australia is irrevocably bound
     to South—East Asia, has announced its plans to cope with the new
     era dawning in the region.
       The historic role of Britain as a firm military presence in
     the area is coming to an end. It will be finished by the end of
     1971.
       The basic purpose behind the decision to retain our forces
     there after 1971 is this - the preservation of security so that
     economic conditions can be advanced and living standards lifted.
       Our decision means that Australia will continue co—operating
     with Malaysia/Singapore and New Zealand to seek to achieve these
     objectives.
       Australian forces have in the past played a vigorous role in
     supporting military measures to protect the security of
     Malaysia—Singapore.
       Because of our position, we cannot remain aloof from the
     problems besetting this region. If there is instability, if
     there is poverty, disillusion and despair, we will be directly
     affected.
       In Parliament, the Prime Minister announced details of our
     attitude: we will maintain land, air and sea forces in Mal<ysia/
     Singapore after the British leave.
       The Prime Minister, as does every member of the Government,
     rejects utterly the 'Fortress Australia' concept — withdrawal
     to our own shores.
       Withdrawal, we believe, would pose greater risks than maintaining
     forces in the region at a period when we are not directly backed
     by a great power.

•

                 —2—


        The countries of the region who hai;e come to look to us
      for help would be sadly disillusioned.
        In the words of the Prime Minister withdrawal by Australia
      would be 'contrary to our historic actions and future interests'.
        We could hardly expect smaller countries there to have much
      faith in the things for which we stand or larger countries
      outside the region to despatch assistance should the need arise.
        The Prime Minister has said that if threats arise outside
      of the capacity of the countries involved after 1971, then we
      would look to the support of allies outside the region.
        We continue to place a high value on economic aid through the
      Colombo Plan, involving considerable aid to Asian students in
      Australia.
        We continue to direct efforts towards helping Malaysia/
      Singapore to improve their living standards and improve their
      industrial bases.
        But we recognise this process takes time.
        As the Prime Minister said, 'Just as ultimate stability
      depends on progress and rising standards of living, so does the
      possibility of progress depend on maintaining immediate stability.
      And provision for defence is necessary to help provide that immediate
      stability.'

