<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference
Description: press statement
Date: 8/11/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   3ATIJ T               November 8th,1959
MALCOLM most
        In this last week representatives of 800 pillion people have
sat in the House of Representatives. It has been an historic occasion for
Australia.
        On Monday His Excellency the Governor—General opened the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference. The ceremony was }old
in the House of Representatives. Since little is known of this Association
I thought it might be a good idea to say something about it.
        There are thirtyfour countries represented by the C.P.A.
They are all countries which were once in the British"Empire and which are
now part of the Commonwealth of Nations which has grown out of the British
il.mpire. People of every colour, race and creed belong to the Association.
All the Dominions of the Commonwealth are members, in addition to many email
islands and countries which have a certain measure of self—government, but
over whom Britain still wields some authority. Two countries that come
to mind in this category are the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
which covers a largo area of Africa, and then again the country of Bermuda
Sir John Cox, the delegate from Bermuda, in replying to the welcome to
Australia by the Prime Minister, said that although Bermuda did not have full
Dominion statue it has as much self—government as it wanted, for the simple
reason that it was a tiny country and could never stand completely on its
own feet,
        Therefore, just because many of the representatives of
these Commonwealth countries do not have complete and full self—government
it does not necessarily mean that they all want to be completely independent
of Britain.
         Cases of this kind are, of course, in exception to the
general policy of giving full self—government to all the former colonies
when the time is suitable,
         This is only the second time that the Association has
met in Australia. It is unlikely that it will come to Australia again in
the lifetime of many members of the present House of Representatives. This
is because the Commonwealth now has so many free and independent countries
in it, and they wish to be given the honour and privilege of being the host
nation in turn. There are thirtyfour countries concerned, and the Conference
only meets every second year. Therefore,in the normal course of events,

                                2
       take 68 years to get b
        The C.P.A. does not makes laws; it cannot be binding on spy govern- 
ment. Representatives who come to the Conference cannot take home orders 
that they must do this or they must do that. However, the value of the 
Conference lies in the free interchange of ideas between people of differs 
countries. It does not matter if countries within the Commonwealth have 
different points of view so long as we can understand and respect the pain 
of view of the other countries. As one delegate put it this morning, to 
understand the other point of view is very often as useful as to agree. 
It would be quite hopeless to expect n31, members of the Commonwealth to 
have the same point of view on many of the problems confronting the world. 
At times we, in Australia, have severe differences of opinion on domestic 
and foreign policy and we all come from very much the same background. 
How much more impossible then to expect the members of the Commonwealth. - 
the people from India, Ghana, Malaya, from Nigeria or Jamaica to have 
the same points of view.
        In this coming week the Conference will discuss m problem 
the most important of which will be (won oa is co-operation within the 
Commonwealth and the problems of undeveloped territories of the Commonwealth 
In addition, the Conference will devote considerable time to international 
affairs and defence.
         I will write   in on some of these     s, but the important
        remember about the C.P.A. is that it sets an example to the world. 
Probably every race and every religion found in the world is found some- 
where inside this great Commonwealth . If the members of the Commonwealth 
can, by their example, show that they can get along with each other and help 
each other, then we have some hope for a more secure future.
          In the colonial days when many of these countries were ruled by 
       ish Colonial Office ties to the then Zmpire were obvious and direct. 
       e direct ties have been cut but these countries, some of Whom had
     origins in slavery, are all strong supporters of the Commonwealth. 
They are joined by no act of law, by no threat of force, but by the firm 
belief that the Commonwealth stands for justice and Democracy. If I may
quote from the Leader of the Opposition, Dr. matt, who put it this way 
 We want peace but demand liberty

