<!--start metadata-->
Title: "Age" - economy
Description: radio talk 
Date: 16/09/1956
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                             AGE

                Australians are quite justifiably asking why we are 
     having recurrent economic crisis despite determined efforts by the 
     Government to cure the problems of an unfavourable trade balance
     and of inflation.      The reason is that we have attached symptoms 
         not causes, measures have been short-term ones, expedients 
     that offer only temporary relief.
i               Let's see what the real factors are at the present time
     contributing to the present state of near emergency.           The terms 
     of trade have moved 20% against us since a few years ago but 
     exporting industries are profitable and the terms of trade can be
     regarded as normal.       The volume of exports is high due largely       to 
     good seasons and to an intensive development in primary industries. 
     The flow of new capital into Australia in the last two or three 
     years is comparable with previous experience and can be regarded
     as normal -.as canthe--taxes-- f- trade end --the -volume °_af exports. 
    Volume of imports on the other hand are abnormally high. The 
    Government announced last October that it wished to reach a rate 
    of more than £55M. a month, yet in August we imported £78Iv. of 
    overseas goods, despite heavier and heavier restriction. The 
    Government's view had been that the high rate of imports was caused 
    by a consumption boom but in his bedget the Treasurer showed that 
    personal consumption rose by 8% gross Iaafzk private expenditure and 
    capital equipment by 8.4% and total public au6hority spending by
    9.8%.     This reveals a boom in Government spending rather than in 
    personal consumption.
               Vie are no nearer to curing the real cause of our imbalance 
    than we were twelve months ago. If anything, the signs of inflation
    are worse than they then were despite determined efforts on the part 
    of the Government to curb pressures on the economy, which if they 
    continue will inevitably make our balance of payments position even 
    worse.

                                     IMO


               The answer to this persistent fundamental and structural 
Í     problem can be found in the manner and pattern of our development. 
      Over a million migrants have coma into this country in the last
      few years.    Almost all of these have found employment in 
      secondary industry.     This is proved by the fact that despite 
      greatly increased production there are less people employed in 
      primary industries now than before the war (Mechanisation alone
      has made this possible).     These primary industries and expecially
      wool earn all but 12% of our overseas credits.     Their prosperity 
      has xade the spectacular development of the last few year. possibb. 
      Unhapeilti the present pattern of development is slowly eroding 
      the prosperity and high standard of life dependent upon prosperous 
      primary industries, It is significant that farm income fell 6% 
      in the last year while incomes of all other sections rose consider-
      ably.
               I said nearly all migrants go into industry which require 
      great quantities of capital equipment and raw materials. Nearly 
      80% of all imports is now absorbed by these two items. The 60% 
      of imports that is taken up with raw materials of one kind or 
      another comprises 30% to 40% of all the raw mates ial used in
      Australian industry.     We have the position then of secondary 
      industries that contribute only 1 of our overseas funds abeoobing 
      80% of those funds in demands for raw materials and capital equip- 
      ment without which they can't continue to operate and without
      which there would be great unemployment among the industrial
      population.    These facts show the too great dependence of our 
      development upon the export of primary industries.

t

                     Ale   ~

          To make it rossible for our strictly limited overseas 
funds to pay for these essential imports we have savage and severe
import restrictions.  These have several unhappy results :- 
   (1) They encourage high cost industries that offer above 
        award rates for labour ene EC) make it almost impossible 
        for industries to export as costs are forced up. 
       Stimulus to export is nil as the local market is 
        highly profitable at almost any .rice,
       They work like Cue unfair and inefficient form of 
        capital issues control on legitimate import business ..- 
        that are hard hit and shareholders' equity in a 
        company co affected can be destroyed overnihit by 
        administrative action.
    (4) Encourage new industries to begin open ationc jthis
        will create additional demands for raw materials
        and capital equipment from overseas. ` 
          We will never cure inflation, without some form of 
internal deflation, while we have import restrictions of the
present intensity.  if we do get internal deflatian,im-
migration will most certainly come to a dead stop - a thing that
no one wants.
          The solution to our problems is to cut migration
to 90,000 gross a year, not as permanent policy but for two
or three years until secondary industries can be encouraged
to export which many can do ail present price levels but which
they will not be able to do if inflation continues.
          I believe that such a out will have the following
results over about 18 months, The rate of development 
unhappily but necessarily will fall, the rate of increase in 
demand for capital equipment and raw materials will fall and
it will become possible to ease import restrictions.,; 
Eventual policy should be o abolieh them and allow the Tariff

                        ~ 4

Bocrd to curry out its proper function)  With the cessation
of inflationary pressures, we would reap the benefits of a 
more stable and freer economy, , with injustice for people on 
fixed incomes n mx• abolished.
           Advocates of the present or a higher rate of 
in-migration will claim that new industries produce thin ..s 
once imported, and therefore deeJard for imports is lessened. 
This is a falce proposition because the import doman Âs for capital 
equipment and raw materisals together pith the import demands 
of a greater popul4tion has continually over the lawt few years 
been greater than the import replacement activity of industry.
           Secondly, they will compare on rate of progress with 
the United States which for 70 years was higher than ours has
ever been.    Examination of geographic conditions in the two
countries show this is a completely false comparison.  We 
have not the natural advantages of the U.S.. Comparison with 
Canada whose rate of progress has more nearly compared with our
own would be ;lore correct.  Also when U.S. was developing 
so rapidly she had no Social Services and no defence bill. 
If the £400M. or 2/5ths of the budget these items absorb could 
be turned to development then it would be a different story.
           Thirdly, advocates of pre: ent policy say there are 
many internal things we can do to make ourselves more efficient 
so we can maintain the present rate of migration. Increase 
savings, change the incidence of taxation, work harder or longer 
hours, trey would all effect the prevent 2osition but are au 
of them politically practical.
           Fourthly, these advocates may plead migration agreements 
with other countries, that if once cut down it is difficult to
build up again.    It may be so but there are fundamental structural 
problems in our economy now. If we don't cure them we may well 
break our economy and destroy Australia as an attractive country for
migration.    Where would these agreements be then?

- 5 -

—~	
ea~..~ dt.K --•--~-
;	
..terLA.,4X41 1.40.e...4" 
;
Fifthly, it will be said that I have no faith in
the future of Ulis country because I wish to slow our too
rapid rate of development.	
It would not be true. To AaJiue •
reali:	
to assess our resources , to wish to use 'them will
is not to lack faith.	
To wish to stop the drift towards more 
and heavier contro s,(none of which attack the problem at its  
cause but which only cloud tho Issue for a short time before it  
rises in a sor := acute m irnler) to want to attack our problems at  
their baso so that the foundation of our economy may be secure,
to do these things is not to lack faith.
U1/4)
er104."
tAAAA-Ak,
~ Cpc
 t,Jr~	
( t~
~ 	
r 
ot,Pi'L‘"
 ~ 
4e `-‘144.9	
4"
It....to.c...1„
-	
,32.P stcv.E.
ore,— 1-4 %-x'cw.-	
1"'
1-teAt--
0PAP'%•"


