<!--start metadata-->
Title: Some more on the common market
Description: press statement
Date: 27/08/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


              PRESS STATEMENT

                                                              August 27th,1961

                              SOME MORE ON THE COMMON MARKET

                       The day after the Budget was introduced, the Prime Minister 
              reported to the Parliament on the Common Market and on the United 
              Kingdom negotiations for entry. Both the Prime Minister and Mr. 
              McEwen, speaking in the debate, showed that they were very well 
              aware of the great political implications involved in the grand 
              design of the Common Market but they were both principally concerned 
              that the Common Market countries and the United Kingdom should be 
              fully informed of the implications for Australia's export trade.
                       The Prime Minister has said that protection of Australia's 
              overseas trading interests is regarded as the prime duty of the
              Australian Government.    For this purpose, a special Cabinet 
              Sub-Committee has been appointed which will be in constant negotiations 
              with the United Kingdom and the Common Market countries, and all 
              aspects of Australia's trade with Europe are being examined. At 
•             the present stage it is difficult to do much more than keep a close 
              watch on the position and impress upon European countries the 
              importance of allowing access for Australian goods. The reason for 
              this is that the Common Market Agricultural Policy has not yet been
              defined.   I have said before that the general purpose of the common 
              Agricultural Policy will be to preserve a high standard of farming 
              in European countries, and at the same time, to maintain a larger 
              degree of agricultural self-sufficiency, but no specific details 
              have been adopted.
                       At the moment, there are proposals before the Common 
              Market countries regarding different commodities but the levels of 
              duty which would affect our exports to Europe have not yet been 
              fixed and there is some argument inside the Common Market itself 
•             as to how high these duties should be. For example, France is 
              an efficient farmer and her protection is much lower than in 
              Germany where farming is inefficient. The French would not want 
              the common duties against outsiders to be as high as the German 
              protective wall because France feels that this would stimulate too 
              much uneconomic production inside the Common Market. If France 
              wins this argument, the duties against outsiders such as Australia 
              could be relatively low. If Germany wins, the duties could be very 
              high. We must hope that when the United Kingdom comes into 
              negotiations and when we negotiate on our own account for our own 
              commodities we will be able to tip the scales in favour of keeping 
              a reasonable access for outside markets.
                         Australians should realize that the important question 
              for us is access to markets in Europe including the United Kingdom. 
              The preferences about which so much has been spoken are, quite 
              frankly, not all that important for all commodities. There is no 
              preference on wool. There is no preference on wheat although there 
              is a contractual obligation to take up 750,000 tons a year from
              Australia.   Incidentally, this is an obligation that has not

                                           2

              However, French wheat can already get into England on the same terms 
              as Australian wheat and with much smaller transport charges, as you 
              would realize. There is no preference for mutton and lamb. The 
              general preference for beef is about 3/4d. per lb. and this is not 
              very great when compared with the retail price of beef in shops. 
              Preference for butter is 15/- stg. per cwt. which again is not 
              sufficient to tip the scales in favour of Australian butter as against 
              Danish butter which can come in across the Channel and which commands, 
              unfortunately for us, a premium price.
                          I say this to emphasise that in my view it is not the 
              preference that is important but the right of access on reasonable 
              terms to European markets and this is what our negotiators must 
              press for.
                          Ever since 1956 when the Department of Trade was first 
              established, the Government has been aware of the dangers that could 
              occur to our trade from the growth of the Common Market and since 
              that time the Government has therefore been active in trying to 
•             gain access to new markets which would not be affected by Common 
              Market arrangements. This was one of the reasons behind the 
              negotiations of the Japanese Trade Agreement which has been of 
              inestimable benefit to Australia. Trade Commissioner services 
              have been expanded many times in many different countries and, at 
              the same time, the Export Payments Insurances Corporation was 
              established so that exporters could ensure themselves against a 
              failure to pay on behalf of one of their purchasers, e.g., if a 
              sale of a certain commodity was made to an Asian country which, 
              for some reason, failed to pay, the Company concerned in Australia 
              would not have to stand the loss. This has encouraged manufacturers 
              and exporters generally to enter markets which they might refrain 
•             from doing without this protection. At the same time, only in 
              the last session of Parliament, special legislation was passed 
              to give added tax incentives to people who wre travelling abroad 
              in search of new markets. One of two Trade Missions have already
              been organized as a direct result of this legislation. Because 
              of the efforts that the Government has undertaken to disperse 
              Australia's tradem Pacific countries now absorb 33% of all our
              exports where, a few years ago, they absorbed only 14%. To take 
              a positive example, in beef, 3 years ago, the United Kingdom 
              and Europe bought £29M. worth of beef while last year they bought 
              only £9 1/2M. a fall of £20M.   Over the same period, the purchasers 
              of beef by Pacific countries have risen from about £20M. to £28M.
                          It is impossible, at this stage, to say what difficulties 
               Australian producers might have to face as a result of the Common
               Market.   At the best, the difficulties could be very slight, 
               dependent on the concessions our own and the United Kingdom
               negotiators can gain.   At the worst, our trade could be gravely 
               affected.

                                              3

                             There is one other point which I made during the
               debate and it is this.   If, because of Common Market arrangements, 
               certain producers in this country have their livelihood jeopardised 
               or suffer hardship, then the individual should not be made to bear 
               the burden. The Community as a whole should bear the burden and
               spread the burden throughout the nation.  For example, if the 
               dairy industry or the dried fruits industry were drastically 
               affected and lost a large part of their market in the United 
               Kingdom it would mean considerable hardship for specific areas 
               of Australia. This hardship should not be borne by individuals. 
               It should be borne by the nation. This is a point which I hope 
               all primary producer organizations will fight for. In doing so 
               they would certainly have whatever support I could offer.



•












•

