<!--start metadata-->
Title: The tobacco industry and the American wool tariff
Description: press statement
Date: 4/10/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PaESS STATENENT :

 MALCOLM FRA.SER :

                                                       October 4th,1964


            THE TOBACCO INDUSTRY AND THE AmERICAN WOOL TARIFF



                   In the last week the estimates for the Department of 
 Primary Industry were debated. The tobacco industry achieved more attention 
 than it ever had in the past. The Opposition charged that the Government had 
 neglected this industry and that the protection and assistance given to it was 
 not adequate. This seemed an odd charge to make because in the last fourteen 
 years tobacco production in Australia has grown from under 3.5 million to 32 
 million pounds per year. The industry is more highly protected than any 
 other primary industry, the general rate of duty on imported tobacco is /160%/. 
 There is a concessional rate which still stands at 120%. This rate is based
 on the landed cost of American tobacco. In addition to this there is a 
 device called the Mixing Regulation which requires Australian manufacturers to 
 use a certain proportion of local leaf before they can qualify for the 
 concessional rate of duty. This mixing Regulation has been increased from 
 3% to 4.5% in the last eighteen years.

                  The odd thing about this industry is that so much protection
 is necessary. 

                  The Australian tobacco growers are not competing with the 
 low wage countries of Asia or Africa, they are competing with the tobacco 
 growers of the United States.

                  It is very much a labour intensive industry and is not 
 adaptable to really heavy capitalization. Labour costs in the United States
 are of course much higher than here. We can produce most agricultural 
products very much cheaper than the United States but their growers get about 
 60d. a pound and ours require between 120d. and 140d. a pound before they are 
 really happy with the situation.

                  The reason for the comparative inefficiency of the Australian 
producer as compared with the American must apparently be found in adverse 
climatic and soil conditions.

                  As a result of our very high protection to this industry 
the United States share of the Australian market has fallen from 66% to 33% 
in the post war years. We may tend to say this is a good thing because our 
 local industry is replacing imports and that this is the important consideration.

                  It would be all right if this were the end of the story,
 but it is not. 

                  There is an inter—relationship between tobacco and other 
major commodities exported from Australia. This can perhaps be understood 
when I say that the Americans feel very much about our tobacco policy as most 
Australians feel about the policy which the United States Senate tried to 
impose on our meat trade with America. There point of grievance is this. 
While the Australian market is growing quite markedly, American imports have 
been pegged largely because of the very heavy protection afforded our own 
industry which demands a much higher price than our competitors. The
Americans would have no case if our industry were relatively efficient and 
anywhere near competitive, but it is not.

                  In the not too distant future an important international 
trade and tariff negotiation will take place. The purpose of these 
negotiations will be to reduce trade barriers between countries.

                                 2


              One of the things that I hope the Australian Government will 
ask for will be a reduction in the American Wool Tariff. This could have a 
noticeable effect on the price of wool in the Australian auction market. 
However, I am utterly convinced that the Americans will ask for a change in 
our tobacco policy if we expect them to reduce the wool tariff. A reduction 
in the American wool tariff could increase the price at Australian wool
auctions by one penny or two pennies a pound. For every penny increase in 
price £8M additional of overseas funds would be earned by the wool industry.

              And so we have the interests of Australia's greatest industry 
inter woven with the interests of an industry that is thoroughly uneconomic 
by world standards.

              Let me just demonstrate how Australia could be advantaged by 
some change in policy.

              If all present Australian tobacco production were imported the 
equivalent tobacco could be bought for £10M. This, of courses would be a 
nonsense policy because only the most inefficient of the Australian producers 
would go out of production. If Australian tobacco production were reduced 
by one-third, the additional imports that would be involved would cost about 
£3M or £4M on present import prices and if a consequent reduction of the wool 
tariff increased the price of wool in the Australian auction by ld., Australia 
would gain an additional £8m in overseas funds. The balance of advantage of 
this sort of arrangement would clearly be on our side.

              This sort of deal would be good business for Australia and if 
we expect to have a reduction in the wool tariff it may be necessary.

              This certainly would not mean casting the tobacco industry to
the wolves.

              Some of the additional customs revenue obtained from increased 
imports could and should be used for the reorganization of the tobacco industry. 
If necessary inefficient producers could be bought out, and they could be 
established in other industries with no hardship to themselves.

              Let me be more precise. If a change in our tobacco policy 
led to a reduction in the American wool tariff and if at the same time 
five million pounds weight of additional tobacco had to be imported £1.75M 
of extra customs revenue would be collected. This could be devoted to the 
reorganization of the industry and over a period the less efficient producer 
could be established in other industries with great benefit to themselves 
and to Australia.


                                o 0o

