<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural Reconstruction Scheme
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 9/04/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                 g,s,. u-,~r -~, vA)

                                                   3HA Sunday 9 April, 1972.
          TEXT OF BROADCAST BY                     3YB Thursday, 13th April, 1972. 
          THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER                  3LK Tuesday 11th April, 1972.



                Last week, Commonwealth and State Ministers completed
         a most important review of all aspects of the operation of the 
         Rural Reconstruction Scheme in Sydney.
                This has been an issue with which I have been concerned and 
         involved for the last year or so, not only because of my concern 
         as a Member of the Federal Government and as a farmer keenly 
         interested in the welfare of rural industries, but also as a 
         Member for an electorate where the fortunes of so many people are 
         bound up with the economic health of those industries.
               As a result of last week's review the funds available in the 
         first two years of the Scheme are now more than double those 
         originally contemplated. The Commonwealth was to have made 
         available $100 million to the States over four years. Now that
•        $100 million is to be spent by the end of the next financial
         year.    In addition a further $18 million has been provided for 
         forward commitments. All this represents at least a doubling of 
         the original rate of expenditure.
               Of the additional $18 million to be provided, $15 million 
        will be used to cover a carry—over of commitments into the 1973-74 
        year, and $3 million will be given to Queensland outside the 
        rural reconstruction scheme on a matching basis, to account for 
        the catastrophic effects of drought in that State.

              2.

   Victoria will receive $3.3 million of the extra $15 million 
according to the formula agreed to when the scheme was first 
established.
   All this — the marked acceleration of the period of 
expenditure of the $100 million, together with the extra $18 million 
allocated by the Commonwealth, should materially improve the scheme. 
Last week's agreement will give the States more flexibility in the 
use of the funds.
   For the immediate future, States will encourage farm
build—up applications to the maximum extent, and the Commonwealth 
Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Sinclair, said they will approve 
all eligible cases.
   I believe this reflects a realistic approach and should 
help farmers facing particular difficulty.
   It was also agreed at last week's talks that the period of 
loan to farmers for farm build—up purposes could be extended for 
a term up to 30 years at the discretion of the State administering 
authority. This would mean a marked reduction in the annual 
interest and capital repayments by the farmer to the authority.
   While these changes are designed to assist the States 
in making the farm build—up section of the scheme more effective, 
Ministers have not overlooked the plight of those farmers
obliged to leave the industry. Rehabilitation loans for such 
farmers suffering personal hardship have been increased from a 
maximum of $1,000 to $3,000.

ti



            After the conference last week, the Primary Industry 
      Minister, Mr. Sinclair, observed that the States had responded 
      well to the Commonwealth initiative in maintaining the momentum 
      of reconstruction. This is true when one considers the
      differing circumstances throughout Australia. These have led to 
      differential rates of expenditure,not only on debt reconstruction, 
      but also farm build—up. For instance, the situation in Victoria
 •    has been different to that in Queensland where there has been 
      prolonged drought in both sheep and farming areas.
            The authorities administering the rural reconstruction
      scheme in the various States must surely gain by liaising and
      attempting as far as possible, to achieve a degree of
      uniformity throughout the nation. With this in view, representatives 
      of the authorities will meet within the next two months.
            There is one important feature about rural reconstruction 
      that I believe often escapes the majority of Australians who
 •    live in our big cities. A healthy rural economy is essential to 
      the nation's well—being generally. The provision of finance 
      for farm build—up and for rehabilitation loans is of real long- 
      term benefit to all Australians, not just the farming community.
            Apart from the need of country people for a secure
      rural economy, there is the vital consideration that our primary 
      products are a key factor in our international trade.
            Their part in our export earnings remains crucial. As 
      a nation we cannot afford rural depression. Through decisive 
      and widespread action, including the rural reconstruction scheme, 
      the Commonwealth aims to ensure a healthy rural economy.
            Goodbye for now,

