<!--start metadata-->
Title: Loans affair
Description: electoral talk
Date: 20/07/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


The Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.        Exclusive Release to Age
                                     & Sydney Morning Herald.

                                     Sunday, 20 July, 1975.

            RADIO TALK TO THE ELECTORS OF WANNON

In all the words and fury that surround the Khemlani Loans 
Affair, two unanswered charges stand against Mr Whitlam and
his Government.   The first charge is that there has been gross 
incompetence demonstrated by Mr Whitlam in managing Australia's
affairs.   The second charge is that, on the available evidence, 
there was a deliberate conspiracy to evade the Constitution for
secret and disturbing political ends.  The facts now available 
indicate an illegal conspiracy to defraud and deceive, to avoid
by subterfuge the constraints of the Constitution. Both 
charges are unanswered.

More serious charges could hardly be made.  Thus the Opposition
Parties have pressed, and will continue to press, for a Royal
Commission.   The attempt to call witnesses to the Senate was 
only made, with reluctance, after we had exerted all the power 
and persuasion we could to get Mr Whitlam to appoint a Royal
Commission.   Mr Whitlam has several times rejected that 
request.

Let me review the weight of the charges.  The charge of
incompetence hardly needs repetition.  The Government ignored 
the advice of the Treasury, of Treasurer Crean, and it went to 
the underground of international finance to raise $4,000 million. 
That would have involved a repayment of over $18,000 million in
20 years' time.   The funds were for "temporary purposes". 
How temporary can they be for twenty years? The impact of
$4,000 million on the Australian economy was ignored. The 
increased burden of overseas indebtedness for every Australian
was brushed aside.  The proposed loan would have increased

                         2.

the debt for every Australian family by $1,000. It would
have increased the overseas debt of Australia by four times, 
from a little over a $1,000 million Australian to over $4,000 
million Australian.  It would have left our sons and daughters 
with a massive repayment of over $18,000 million in 20 years. 
Quite apart from the burden that must be about the greatest 
overseas currency gamble in history.

We don't need the money, as the present Treasurer Mr Hayden, 
and as the present Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party,
Mr Crean has said.  Our overseas reserves are high. Nothing 
more needs saying about the charges of incompetence.

The second charge is much more serious. What a senior group 
of Ministers, led by the Prime Minister, have done strikes at
the very integrity of our political institutions. The
important questions remain unanswered. The most relevant 
documents remain secret. What was the haste to rush through 
Executive Council approval before Mr Whitlam left for overseas 
with Sir Lennox Hewitt? Why was proper legal advice not 
sought? Why did the Government describe the funds as being 
for temporary purposes when they were for 20 years? Which, 
if any, of Mr Whitlam's explanations concerning the use of 
the funds is correct? We can dismiss "temporary purposes" 
as being a deceit and a subterfuge. What of the other 
purposes in the Executive Council memorandum - the stated 
reasons were clearly a fabrication, as was shown in the 
Parliament. What of Mr Whitlam when he said that the 
purposes were related to energy? Or what of
Mr Whitlam in the Representatives' debate last week when he
listed other purposes.  He then said the loans were for 
capital development, and he returned to some of the 
discredited reasons of the Executive Council minute.

                         3.


The distinguished Professor of Law at Melbourne University, 
Colin Howard, has suggested a further reason - he said the 
funds were of budgetary proportions and that the Government 
was seeking carry-on finance in case Supply was blocked. 
Professor Howard was an adviser to the then Attorney General - 
and signatory to the Executive Council minute - Senator 
Murphy. What destruction of our institutions would have 
been involved in that course?

These reasons cannot all be correct; which if any is proved, 
and which is false? On 20 May Mr Whitlam told the Parliament 
that Loan Council approval would be sought if and when the
money was available.  This cannot be believed. The Executive 
Council minute was clearly worded to avoid the Loan Council. 
The former Deputy Prime Minister was sacked for misleading the 
Parliament, but is not the Prime Minister guilty, from his own 
words, of the same charge? Is he not guilty of misleading 
and misusing the Executive Council for his Government's secret 
purposes - so secret the Cabinet was not told, much less 
Parliament or the people.

The answers are locked in the minds of Ministers and in the
files of the Departments. On the charges, on the evidence, 
there is already a strong case against him. If he had 
nothing to hide there would have been a Royal Commission. 
If he had nothing to hide he would have allowed Public
Servants to speak in the Senate. The Government instruction 
to Public Servants not to speak before the Senate rests not 
on principle but on a determination to suppress the facts.

Public Servants do give evidence before Senate Committees on 
a regular basis. Mr Whitlam moved and supported a motion 
calling the Secretary for the Department of Air to the Bar 
of the House of Representatives on the 8th November 1967 so 
that facts he claimed the Government was trying to hide could
be made available. Mr Whitlam changes his principles as he

                         4.


changes his clothes.  He now says that because of the principle
of ministerial responsibility, Public Servants should not be
called even to present facts.  But the Parliament must clearly 
have the right to enquire into the activities of Ministers
responsible to it.  When Ministers ignore charges, refuse to 
answer questions and participate in a massive cover-up what
does one expect the Parliament to do?  It is the safeguard, 
the watch-dog, the protector of the people from an unreasonable, 
irrational and secretive Executive.

The major weapon available to the Parliament to check the
Executive is control of funds.  Under our system the Executive 
cannot spend funds unless authorised by Parliament. What else 
is $4,000 million but funds? They were sought outside the
Parliament by underhand, illicit means.  Free availability of 
such funds would enable the Government to ignore Parliament. 
Are we to say that under no circumstances Public Servants can
speak the facts plainly to the Parliament.  If Crown 
Privilege prevails, then clearly such Public Servants would 
not give evidence before Parliament nor even before a Royal
Commission.   Mr Whitlam has made it plain that he objects 
to any Inquiry, not merely to the Senate Examination.
Mr Whitlam's determination to preserve secrecy is complete. 
It is hard to sustain an argument that public servants must
always be silent.   A sound judgement of whether Ministers
have acted properly cannot be made without the facts. If
Ministers refuse to provide facts in a critical case, 
Parliament and the people are entitled to assume the worst.
This is precisely what has happened in this case. If
Ministers had nothing to fear from the evidence of Public 
Servants surely that evidence would have been made available. 
This is not to question the value of public service anonymity, 
but to emphasise the importance of facts to an informed 
judgement by the Parliament, especially when the most serious 
questions of propriety have been raised.

                         5.



Mr Whitlam would have it that we must remain in ignorance unless
he determines otherwise.  That is the hallmark of a Government
and a system different to our own. We will continue to press 
for a Royal Commission and a full and open enquiry, so that 
people may judge, not on our interpretation of available facts, 
but on the basis of a complete exposure and an impartial
conclusion.  While the Prime Minister refuses such an Enquiry, 
we and the people have sufficient grounds to assume guilt.

