<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth ban on export of birds
Description: press statement
Date: 20/12/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


P8Ep8 STATEMENT         December 20th, 1959
iéALCOJ.M FRASZR
      You probably saw a few days ago reports in the national press 
that the Commonwealth has banned the export of all birds, wether trapped 
in their native state or whether they are aviary bred. Export of birds 
will only be allowed on a zoo to zoo basis, thus destroying the poecibility 
of evasion of the regulations.
      Several people originally approached me on this matter very 
nearly a year ago. Then as soon as Parliament assembled in 1959 several of 
us approached the Minister for Customs and asked him to use the power that 
the Commonwealth has always possessed to ban the export of birds on the two 
grounds, one that the trading of birds constituted a threat to the survival 
of some species of birds and secondly on the grounds of very severe losses 
and the cruelty concerned in the trade. Losses have been placed as high 
as 804 to 90 of birds trapped.
      Senator Henty at that time promised to examine the matter 
fully. After making his examination he felt there should be a conference 
between the Commonwealth and State Officers to examine the whole question. 
He came to this conclusion because traditionally the protection of native 
fauna and flora has rested on the States' shoulders even though the 
Commonwealth control over export and customs gives the Oommonwealth 
considerable powers.
      It was hoped that an agreement could be reached between all 
the states of the Cormmonwealth, on the best means to control this trade. 
The Commonwealth hoped to get this agreement for this reason. The 
Commonwealth has the power to ban the export of birds, but it has no 
power over the internal trading of birds between one State and another and, 
therefore, if there is one )tats which remains un—co-operative the efforts 
of other States can be destroyed by the one State pex nittin ; the internal 
trade to continue.
      This conference between the Commonwealth and the States was 
held during last winter. Unfortunately there were one or two States that 
would not agree that the export of birds constituted a threat to the 
existence of certain species of birds and, furthermore, there were one 
or two States that would not admit that the number of birds trapped must 
very greatly exceed the number of birds traded. In other words, there

   one or two States that would not admit that the losses involved in 
his trade were particularly high.
        it is difficult to get co .plete evidence of loss, but the
   t rosbie JForrison, who was a conservative and accurate man, placed
   Huber of loseee as at least 75%. This loss alone should surely 
have given everyone csauae to doubt whether this trade should be 
permitted, quite apart from it effect on the survival of certain 
species of Australian birds. Unfortunately, one or two States hay 
apparently taken pride in the trade, the 1Fiaher ee and Games Impartment 
of South Australia stated in their 1957/58 report that the demand for 
their live birds and animals from interstate buyers and overseas 
people remained firm; then followed a long lief of birds, totalling 
tens of thou©ands, which have been traded in that State.
        Because of these urco-operative States it was not possible 
for the officers of the States and the Commonwealth meeting together 
to come to a conclusion that would have been of any help to the bird 
lovers of Australia. The only des that these people geed to were 
certain administrative ones which, ih my view, would have increased 
the amount of red tape involved, and which would have done little or 
nothing to protect Australian bird life.
        Senator Henty, who has always been most sympathetic to the 
point of view put forward by bird lover, came to much the same 
conclusion. There were two choices open to him. It would have been 
possible to give the administrative changes arrived at by agreement 
with the States rMa trial for twelve months, Un the other hand, he 
could decide to act now and use the Co { onwealth power to ban the 
export of birds. Senator iienty, with the Government's approval, has 
chosen the latter course and I think we all give him our thane that 
he has done so.
        In the past years the no      trade     e asoetly
fr - m overseas but in recent months t Australian trade,
over which the Commonwealth has no control, has been building up to 
large proportions. If the export of birds is banned now, as it has 
been, the internal trade will probably not be sufficient, or certainly 
we hope it will not be sufficient, to maintain the trading industry
which could well die a natural death.

               3

       However, if the Commonwealth waited another twelve
or eighteen months before banning the export of birds the local
trade may well have grown to such proportions that it would sustain
trading in its own right. I think this could have been a significant
factor in deciding the Government to act now.
      This is my last statement until Parliament rentuaes
next year. I am glad to have been able to end on a note that
should appeal to many Australians from all walks of life, and I
wish you one and all a Happy Christmas and Prosperous New Year.

