<!--start metadata-->
Title: Loans affair
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 26/10/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     • Leader of the Opposition
       AND MEMBER FOR WANNON, MR MALCOLM FRASER


                                                     SUNDAY OCTOBER 26, 1975

       FOR PRESS                                     THURSDAY OCTOBER 30, 1975





       The Opposition has consistently maintained that there is more 
       to answer on the overseas loans affair.

       The Government's representative in the affair, the money broker, 
       Mr Tirath Khemlani, says he was in touch with the Prime Minister's 
       office until September this year, weeks after negotiations were 
       supposed to have been broken off.

       The Prime Minister told the Parliament and the people this 
       week that he would answer no more questions about the part he 
       played in the overseas loans affair.

       Two Ministers have been despatched from office over this scandal.

       Both of them had acted as Prime Minister during Mr Whitlam's 
       absences from the country.

       Both of them have gone because the Prime Minister said they did 
       not tell the truth.

       The forced resignation of the second'o:f these two Ministers, 
       Mr Connor, was the final reprehensible event which drove the 
       Opposition to reject this Government.

       Regrettably for the health of this nation the overseas loans 
       affair has not ended.

       The Prime Minister told the House that négotiations were 
       broken off in May with the intermediaries which the Government 
•      was employing.

       But Mr Connor was driven from office when it was disclosed in 
       the Press that he continued to negotiate after this time to 
       put Australia into hock for a generation.

       The question that Mr Whitlam has not answered and has now refused 
       to hear is a simple one.

       To what extent was he aware that negotiations to raise billions 
       of dollars from the Arabs continued after May 20.






       Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T 2600

              -2-

Mr Whitlam has consistently evaded this question. He has yet 
to give an answer.

He has yet to deny categorically that he was aware that his 
Government continued to negotiate with overseas intermediaries, 
after he had promised the nation that future loan negotiations 
would be conducted properly.

On Thursday in Parliament in a shameful display he said he would 
never answer this question.

When the Opposition consequently moved to bring on a censure 
debate the Government used its numbers to prevent the motion 
being moved.

Mr Whitlam would hardly need to twist and turn in this way if 
his conscience were clean.

Twice this week the Government refused to allow debate on the 
overseas loans affair.

Now the former Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Cairns, 
says the Prime Minister knew the story very fully about Connor, 
and that they were in close touch.

Dr Cairns also says that the charge by the Prime Minister that 
he and Mr Connor were disloyal and that they were not telling the 
truth was a lie.

In the whole of Sir Robert Menzies -time as Prime Minister there 
was not a single scandal. This Government has been racked by 
them.

At the centre of the sordid mess stands the Prime Minister, 
pretending purity and claiming that he was too trusting.

The Prime Minister's carefully worded replies in Parliament have 
not been those of someone who was trusting.

Over the weeks and months of this affair it has been notable 
how precisely Mr Whitlam has chosen his words.

He "accepted assurances" given him by members of his Government, 
or he has asked that questions be placed on notice, a parliamentary 
politeness for placed in limbo.

He makes cryptic distinctions between "communications of substance" 
and negotiations.

Never has he said flatly that he was not aware that Mr Connor had 
dealings with Mr Khemlani after May 20.



                          -••/3

~             -3-

  Four men signed the Executive Council document which on 
  December 13 last year described a borrowing programme of 
  four billion dollars as being for temporary purposes.

  One of those men, the former Attorney General, Lionel Murphy, 
  has been appointed to the High Court.

  Two others, Dr Cairns and Mr Connor have beén put out of office. 
  Only the Prime Minister remains. He too has now been named 
  by Dr Cairns as having told a lie.

  Not only has Mr Whitlam refused to face questioning from the 
  Opposition in the overseas loans affair but he also refused 
  a request from the Press Gallery for a press conference and 
  an invitation from a television station to engage in a
  televised debate with me.

  His attitude towards the Parliament and the press is consistent 
  with his attitude towards the people.

  He is frightened to front up. Is it any wonder?

