<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters
Description: Radio talk
Date: 16/05/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                TEXT OF RADIO TALK BY MR. MALCOLM FRASER, MEMBER FOR WANNON
                SUNDAY   16 MAY
                THURSDAY 20 MAY


                           This will be my last radio talk in this Autumn 
                Series. The talks will begin again when the Parliament site 
                for the Budget Session.
                           The Session ended in a furore over the guillotine. 
                I only want to make one or two points about this. I am quite 
                certain the Prime Minister will do everything possible to 
                introduce procedures that will make this last rush of Bills a
                matter of the past. It is certainly important that he do so. 
                For example, if a Minister or a Department want a Bill passed, 
                they should be told that it won't even be considered, except 
•               in cases of dire emergency, unless it is introduced more than 
                four weeks before the end of the Session. The Parliamentary 
                Draftsman also needs to produce his material in a more even flow. 
                He claims he is limited by the availability of draftsmen. I know 
                there are problems here, but they are ones to be overcome.

                           If the rush at the end of this Session was to be
                avoided, the appropriate action would have needed to be taken
                in January or February. By March it was much too late to
                avoid it. By then, the only way to avoid the rush would have
                been to have left the Bills on the Business Paper and pass them
                next Session. Well perhaps we should have done this, but the
                Bills were not controversial in the party political sense. A
 •              number of them were important — Commonwealth employees compensation,
                one concerning superannuation rights, and what in the technical terms
                has been called the portability of pensions. Both bills represented
                a real advance in this area of legislation, which I think was
                recognised by the Opposition. The only point I make here is that
                pressure to pass Bills that have general agreement in the Parliament
                is not the same as pressure over highly contentious or politically
                devisive legislation. There always has been this rush in the years
                I have been in the Parliament. The Prime Minister will be making
                a new effort to overcome and to avoid it, and I believe that with
                proper planning, it is possible to avoid it. It certainly needs
                to be done.

                   2.

            Somebody said to me the other day that they were sorry 
       to see that I was not in the Ministry, but they were glad so far 
       as they were concerned because I could now give more attention to 
       the wool industry.

            In recent times it has been common to hear people talking
       of the rural crisis. This is really too broad a term. It is a
       wool industry crisis. If there were no problems in the wool
       industry, the other difficulties that are now facing us would
       appear relatively insignificant. The problems of the wool
       industry are extreme, and over the last six or seven weeks
       I have spent a great deal of time discussing these matters with
       a number of people concerned with this industry. I wish I could
       see an easy and clear way through the problems, but I would be
•      deceiving you and deceiving myself if I thought I could.

           The Government has introduced the rural reconstruction 
       proposals I spoke about last week as one of a series of measures. 
       I have made it plain that I believe other measures are likely 
       to be necessary, and that a groat deal will depend upon the manner 
       of interpretation of one of the provisions of the agreement between 
      the Commonwealth and the States. The operation of the proposals 
      will need to be reviewed and possibly quite soon - after we have
      seen how it works.

           But the great worry-in my mind, and I imagine in yours, 
      is what do we do if it becomes plain that the world only wants to 
      pay something between 25¢ and 35¢ per lb for wool? With 
•     reorganisation, can it be grown profitably in this part of the 
      world for that price? What is going to happen with the constant 
      increase in costs, the yearly increases in wage rates, which don't 
      advantage the wage earner or the employer, but which only put up 
      the general level of costs.

           The Government's efforts to contain inflation have to be 
      more severe; they have to be more effective. I believe we will 
      see a budget in August designed. to achieve this.

           One thing I do appreciate as a Private Member of Parliament, 
      is being able to talk about these very real problems with the people 
      concerned in much greater detail, and much more imtimacy,

              3.
 than I had time for as Minister for Defence. Representing 
 an electorate like Wannon, which is one of those most affected by 
 low wool prices — not only the farmers, but the people in the 
 towns, and the people in small businesses, makes this imtimate 
 knowledge more important. Even though I always argued the rural 
 case as vigorously as any in Cabinet, you could not hear me, 
 and could not know what I said.
      I will be urging the Government to do everything 
 I believe it ought to do, everything it can do throughout this 
present difficult period, but I don't underestimate its seriousness. 
 I don't suggest it will go away over night. I don't suggest that 
the Government has any magic wand, or that anyone else has a 
magic wand that can cure these problems easily or quickly.
      The Industry is going through a most painful period of 
change, and none of us can see clearly where the end of that 
road is going to lead. This is what gives us all so much cause 
for concern. But at the same time it is the very lack of certainty 
which makes future government planning, or industry planning, 
much more difficult to achieve.
      If any of you want to hear in more detail the remarks 
that I made in the Parliament on the reconstruction proposals, I 
will send copies. I think I might have said this last week, but 
this is an important natter.
      Throughout the winter I will be at my home at Nareen and 
will be much more readily available to discuss particular problems 
if you want to do so. I know nobody has hesitated to contact 
me in the past, and I am sure they won't in the future.
             o Oo 

