<!--start metadata-->
Title: Keynesianism, the Government and the Farmer
Description: electoral talk
Date: 20/04/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL RADIO TALK Embargo: 6,00 20/4/75

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION


There have been two important changes in the nature of the economy
since that great economist John Maynard Keynes made his contributions 
to theories of employment and government expenditure.


The first is to do with the strength of the trade union movement, and
the second change is to do with attitudes by governments towards 
spending taxpayers' money.


Over the last 30 years since Keynes wrote his general theory, 
politicians have come to believe that it is a good thing for them 
to buy votes with other people's money.


Keynesian economics in the 1930's established that it was acknowledged 
and respectable for governments to spend more money in a year than 
they collected in a year, in the interests of creating employment.


While Keynes was writing in the circumstances of the depression, that 
view had validity. In the years after the Second World War, the 
prospect of inadequate demand was still aratter for public concern.


During these years, the social and economic theories of John Maynard 
Keynes were widely practised, with beneficial effect. They contributed 
greatly to the value and richness of our society.


But politicians still had some inhibitions about spending too much of 
other people's money. Recurring balance of payments crises, and 
moderation in the trade union movement, maintained adequate restraint,

keeping inflation to reasonable levels and keeping unemployment to a 
minimum.


However, today the same trade union leadership no longer seems to be 
fearful of large-scale and continuing unemployment, while national 
governments are losing the art of restraint.


As a result, governments now act as if their resources are without 
limit, and as if they can spend and spend and spend, while pressures 
continue for what even the Prime Minister calls excessive wage demands,


Some people'have in their expectations from government lost their
perspective. They believe that they can ask, and that the government 
will provide.


But we must understand that in asking governments we are asking our 
neighbours and our friends for part of their earnings.


What the government pretends it can provide, must come from the 
pockets of every. Australian.


Unless governments and people again learn to practise restraint, and 
unless we can cast off the selfishness and greed which the government 
lhros encouraged for its own poli.ttcal advantage over the post yours,
there will he .little hope for us as n nation end none f'or our social 
and economic structure.






                          ••/2

                                                                                                                  2,
'NW 11--v1-1•iuiiui1 t, itiul 1:1i11 Former

Thu mazer on the land suffers In two ways from the present Government. 
Like ovoi'y AUHiru t trust ho suffers from inflation, now running ut 16 
and 17 'pur cent, und likely tu rise to 20 pur cent luter thls your 
und perhaps evuxi to approach 30 per cent.

Secondly, no suffers under a government which has tended to ignore 
the rural sector, and which is formed by a party, which basically 
believes that they pick up votes in the cities by kickinga poop l u 
who live in the country Lown and on farms.

Ito turns huvo boon fulling                   in nearly every rural sector. Tin; sheep 
industry is in a stuto of                     grout difficulty, the beef industry is in 
u state of crisis and the                     dairy industry has the general problem
of falling returns.

It is the Liberal and Country parties which have positive programmes 
to enable the farmer to face the uncertainties of seasons and 
markets in these times of inflation.

We will establish a rural bank, hopefully in conjunction with trading 
banks and insurance companies, but if that were not possible we would 
establish such a bank in any case, as nearly every other advanced 
country has done.

We would propose that funds be available for the purchase of land 
for up to 30 or 35 years, and that funds also be made available for 
the purchase of producers' equipment, so that people don't have to 
buy their tractors and their combines on hire purchase terms.

We also have new proposals for income stablisation which would enable
people to pay funds into a stabilisation fund in good years for 
withdrawal in later years.

We would maintain the superphosphate bounty for an assured three 
years, and also ask the Industries Assistance Commission to review 
the overall position.

If 'support is to be given to the farming communities, as we believe 
in certain circumstances it must be, we greatly prefer support on 
inputs, leaving the farmers free to make their own decisions about 
their products, rather than having a government subsidy on end 
products, which gives a government much greater control over the 
nature and direction of production.


                                                         • • .

                                                                                Canberra, 18 April 1975

