<!--start metadata-->
Title: Meat industry, politics and slogans,
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 10/11/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


ELECTORAL STATEMENT                   EMBARGO: 6.00 p.m.
                                               Sunday, Nov.10


            THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 

                    ELECTORAL RADIO TALK


A report in the newspapers during the last week indicates one part 
of the Government's attack agz_linst rural communities.

In the electoral maps put forth under the impending re-distribution 
that the Government wants,the Labor Party has recommended the abol- 
ition of five country electorates. These seats could be re- 
distributed in city areas. Country seats would be made very much 
larger than they are now.

Wannon which has 53,000 voters in it would have about 65,000 under 
Labor Party proposals. It is already a very large area with people 
living in every corner of the electorate. It would make proper re- 
presentation more difficult and would weight the politicalpower very 
much in the cities.

We have always known that this is a Labor Party objective but now
we see it in its full form. The Labor Party is out to destroy the 
influence of the country people in the Federal Parliament.

The Meat Industry

The very difficult position facing the Australian beef industry 
does not seem to be understood by people. It is worth noting that 
if it was not for the falling beef prices inflation would now be running 
atanammul rate of 25 or 26 per cent, instead of 20 per cent indicated 
in the last quarter.

Unfortunately, we have had a culmination of slack demand in the United 
States, high slaughterings in the European Economic Community and a 
total ban on imports into Japan. High U.S. slaughterings are being 
caused partly through very high grain prices which make it uneconomic 
to put cattle through feed lots and secondly there has been a very 
severe drought in the U.S.

Japan is in real economic trouble with high inflation and balance of 
payments pr.oblems,largely as a result of rises in the price of oil. 
Her reason for banning beef imports was because of balance of payments 
difficulties.

                                                         ...12

                             2.
We know of the traditional selfishness of the European Economic 
Community in relation to agricultural products. The E.E.C.-is 
reducing its beef numbers and there is a virtual embargo on imports.

Australia's three major markets have closed up at one and the same 
time and the quantity of our beef exports is halved. Prices have 
fallen by two thirds.

One fortunate aspect is that there is a good season throughout the 
whole of Australia and as a result more stock is being kept on farms. 
Producers hope that prices will improve. However, if there is an 
autumn drought the situation could be very difficult for many people 
and cattle will be forced on the market in Australia,

In northern Australia, where beef is the only source of income and 
where the major production is for export beef not of a kind that we 
use in Australia, a real crisis is developing. There is an urgent 
need for carry on finance, for liquid capital to enable producers 
to get through the present difficult period. In the current credit 
squeeze such funds are unavailable.

There is a real danger that unless finance is made available a large pr 
portion of the meat industry could pass into the hands of a few large 
companies. Individual producers would not have the resources to en- 
able them to survive the sort of situation that is developing in 
Queensland. They could therefore be forced to sell out at disastrously 
low prices to those with access to large financial reserves.

I would believe that only Government action could stop this happening. 
The need is urgent.

Politics and Slogans

Some of the slogans used at the last May election sound a bit hollow 
now. The Government was reminded of this last week when there were 
two debates on the economy. One of the quotes used in the debate 
was in the Prime Minister's May statement in which he said:

  "In Australia alone there is no unemployment. In Australia 
   alone unemployment and inflation do not march side by side."

Last September the Minister for Labour,Mr Cameron,said:

  "We can easily get out of the situation we are in at the 
   moment. It will soon be forgotten."

The prize for the most extraordinary and contradictory statements, 
however, goes to Dr Cairns. In July he said:
                            ...73

                             3.
   "Unemployment is insignificant and is carefully under control." 

In August he said:

   "Australia would probably have 150,000 or 200,000 unemployed 
   in the next 12 months."

In September he said:

   "Action by the Government to slow inflation will produce 
   unemployment."

Two days later he said:

   "Inflation could be attacked without resorting to unemployment."

A mass of contradictions. A Government not knowing in which direction 
it is going. Is it any wonder that there is no confidence in the 
business community and that job opportunities are falling and unemploy- 
ment is, tragically, rising rapidly. The latest figures reveal that 
it is now 190,000 people in seasonally adjusted terms.

