<!--start metadata-->
Title: Moratorium marches, Vietnam
Description: radio talk
Date: 17/05/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


i
  RADIO TALK


     By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence


      The parades in protest against the Vietnam war known as the Moratorium 

  were held on May 8, 9 and 10. With the exception of some minor isolated 

  disturbances - some of which were probably understandable - they were peaceful 

  and orderly.

      Everyone wants to see protest or dissent carried out in a responsible, 

  orderly manner. This was a demonstration that had been planned for some time, 

  and had been given no small amount of publicity. Many of the people who gathered 

  to attend these parades were people who genuinely and sincerely yearned for 

  peace, either in Vietnam or anywhere else where there was military conflict. 

  The Moratorium went ahead against the sobering background of recent student deaths 

  in the United States and public discussion in Australia on the possibility of 

  violence taking place here.

      On the Monday following the Moratorium period the news stories came in 

  from overseas telling of violence and injury in demonstrations against U.S.

  intervention in Cambodia in many major overseas cities. One report said 60 London 
      
  policemen and 231 policemen in West Berlin were injured in incidents in those cities. We have been

  used to the gathering toll of protest violence overseas, the increasing acts of 

  extremism, the destruction of property, the injuries to people - many of whom are 

  often innocent bystanders. This has ensued through takeover of the streets, 

  through violent demonstration in the streets. I am not saying that it would 

  necessarily happen in Australia in future demonstrations of this sort, but the 

  history of these occurrences shows the potential dangers inherent in mass street 

  demonstrations.

      Often there is no intent to violence. But a crowd urged forward, a 

  gathering of people caught up with the emotion of a crowd not under real 

  discipline, is often hard to stop. Sometimes, it does not take much to turn 

  order into unruliness - perhaps a small minority in a crowd resorting to violence, 

  sometimes in outbreaks between protest groups and those controlling them. In 

  these circumstances, it is not difficult to imagine order dissolving into violence 

  and I think this is generally more well understood than many demonstration 

  organisers are prepared to admit. It is very much to the credit of the 

  demonstrators that violence did not occur in Australia.

      This, then, is the situation in which many sincere people find themselves. 

  They abhor war; they would like to see it ended. They would prefer to see 

  nations living in understanding and respect of each other. We would all want that 

  situation. Unfortunately, it is not the perfect world we would all want it to 

  be. It is a very real and often harsh world, and one has to be realistic about 

  it. If a drought comes it is no good saying that it does not exist; if a flood, 

  it is no answer to turn one's back and say that the raging water will die down. 

  To want peace is one thing; to achieve it is another.

    c                                    2.

           Everyone has a right to protest, to express his or her views against
what may be regarded as socially, morally or in any way wrong — to express
opposition, however mild or bitter, against laws, regulations, and decisions.
But in the opinion of many people — and I do not include only politicians in
this — those sincere people seeking peace are going the wrong way about it.
They probably see around them other sincere and genuine people bent on the same
mission. They perhaps do not often see the other people who have other
objectives — the cause of the Communist Party. These are the people who say
they want peace, but who really want and work for a North Vietnamese victory in
Vietnam. The foreign policy of the Communist Party has always been that Australia
is wrong, that the United States is wrong, that our friends are wrong, and that
our enemies are always right. The Communist Party has never had any other view.
One might recall that they considered World War II wrong until Russia was attacked —
and then suddenly it was a "just" war. Today, it must be difficult for many people
to understand the support generally given by the Labor Party for the Moratorium.
It is assumed ALP members had the insight to perceive the hands of the Communists at
work in that campaign. Here were members of the Labor Party in step with the
Communist Party, against a background of unfurled Viet Cong flags. It is, I believe,
a tragedy that their advocacy for these demonstrations gives such an aura of
respectability to the Communist Party.
           Many people were surprised when Senator Wheeldon said in Parliament
during the week, and I quote, "I personally, I do not deny, do support the Viet
Cong because I believe that the Viet Cong represents the great mass of the South
Vietnamese people. I make no apology for this."       Those were the words used by 
Senator Wheeldon. They were received with a sense of shock. I never thought 
I would see the day that a member of the Australian Parliament would stand and 
declare his support for an enemy who were ranged against our own troops in the 
battlefield.
           In a speech during debate on this present issue in Parliament, I 
referred to the Member for Lalor, Dr. Cairns, who has said that individuals have 
a right to break laws. He has said that he hoped that the commercial and industrial 
life of cities would be held up as a result of demonstration. He said there was 
a right to occupy the streets — a term strangely reminiscent of the circumstances 
that occurred in Paris time and time again during the course of France's history 
when one republic was overthrown by revolution and replaced by another.
           Numbers of Australian Labor Party members, from the Federal and State 
spheres, consistently backed the Moratorium and supported this disturbing of the 
normal business and commercial life of our cities. This leads me to a charge 
which cannot easily be denied — that they are therefore seeking to change
Australian policies by demonstration and this is not part, nor should it be part
of our democratic process. The way of occupying the streets, the way of disrupting

 ~                 3.

traffic, obstructing pedestrians and interfering with the rights of citizens 
generally is designed to change the policies that have been supported in election 
after election by the Australian people. It indicates a lack of willingness by 
the Australian Labor Party to accept the verdict of the Australian people in 
elections. Australian citizens and members of political parties have full 
opportunity to seek to change laws if they muster a majority of the Australian 
people in their support. But the Australian Labor Party through its long and 
sorry history in recent years has not been able to muster that majority support 
and therefore it has taken to the streets to try to achieve what it has not been 
able to achieve through the ballot box. What the Party appears to be accepting 
is a denial of acceptance of majority rule, and this is not part of the
Australian way.
     I recall that I told Parliament that it should be noted that the war in 
Vietnam had always been more difficult to understand, and therefore always more 
capable of confusion by those who wanted to defeat the purpose which is in 
Australia's best interests. This confusion had arisen out of the nature of the 
conflict. The Communists had learned in Korea that if ever again they amassed 
armies and moved across a border at one stroke they would bring the wrath and 
power of the free world upon them. So they tried a different kind of tactic. They 
tried a war of national liberation, a war in which they dribbled a few people over 
the South Vietnamese border at a time. This seeks to undermine the structure of 
the country to demonstrate that the national government cannot offer and cannot 
afford security. As the years passed the aggression developed into a more 
conventional kind. Divisions of North Vietnamese troops infiltrated down the 
trails and across the borders into South Vietnam. Despite this continued 
aggression, there have been significant progress in recent years.
     For example, there have been a number of nationwide elections, there 
has been great military progress in the performance of the South Vietnamese Army 
and greater responsibility for its own defence. There has been progress in 
the civil field — with greater production of the basic commodities. Given time, 
I believe the tactics and purposes of fighting for the independence and the 
right of the Vietnamese to determine their own future will succeed. However, it 
is the objective of the Moratorium — and the policy of the Labor Party — to withdraw 
immediately. The apparent conclusion is that if Americans and Australians withdraw 
from Vietnam there will be peace and security for everyone there. Nothing could 
be further from the truth. Withdrawal now would ensure that the time will not 
arrive for the people of South Vietnam when they can continue on their own account. 
In that event, a northern Communist victory would be assured.

