<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool industry, unemployment
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 21/05/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                               `c•-6 --~ ~...~ _~~ ~-~~, ~~ c~.~.~. 'U..~..~•

       BROADCAST                          3HA Sunday, 21 May, 1972. 
                                          3YB Thursday, 25 May, 1972. 
                                          3LK Tuesday, 23 May, 1972.


             I probably spend more time in these talks discussing wool
       than any other matter, and in a part of Australia such as ours
       that is reasonable enough. In recent years, we have seen
       considerable diversification in western Victoria, and I beleive
       that is a good thing. But the prosperity of the region still 
       depends to a large extent on the economic health of the wool 
       industry.
             Having this in mind, I was particularly pleased to read 
       the recent statement by the Minister for Primary Industry, 
       Mr. Sinclair, foreshadowing a Government decision on wool 
       acquisition proposals now before the Government within six
       weeks.   Mr. Sinclair, as the Minister responsible for putting 
       the proposals from the Wool Industry Conference to Cabinet, is
•      best equipped to anticipate the timing of the decision.
             It was interesting for me to note the Country Party Leader, 
       Mr. Anthony, indicating his Party's commitment to wool marketing 
       reform, basically along the lines I enunciated in 1963 as a
       private member.  Acquisition at that time was most unpopular 
       and even the more moderate floor price proposals were defeated
       by referendum.  But, of course, as a Cabinet Minister I cannot 
       now commit myself to proposals before Cabinet makes a decision 
       on the matter.
             While acquisition is much discussed at the moment, I
       think we should all bear in mind that the proposals put to the 
       Government by the Wool Industry Conference are not an open and

                                  2.

       shut plan, but are a set of general principles. They do not
       specify financial arrangements which would be crucial to the
       success of any acquisition plan. If you are going to have an 
       acquisition proposal financed by a grower levy, as the Labor 
       Party spokesman, Dr. Patterson, has stated, I doubt if it 
       could get off the ground. How many growers could afford such a 
       levy at the present time ?
            Even the Chairman of the Wool Industry Conference, Mr.
•      Vasey, stated in his letter covering the submission to
       Mr. Sinclair, that probably not all of the powers recommended for 
       the proposed new authority would require immediate implementation 
       and some powers would need supporting legislation by the States. 
       He also wrote that the proportion of wool likely to be sold
       outside the auction system in the foreseeable future would be 
       small.
            All this means that the Commonwealth was not presented with 
       a complete and total plan which could be implemented by 
       Commonwealth decision or legislation alone, and therefore the
       matter requires the fullest consideration. Whatever we do we 
       must do correctly.
            Therefore, Mr. Sinclair's remark that he hoped a statement 
       of Government policy would be possible well in advance of the 
       opening of the new wool selling season on July 1, was a welcome 
       indication from the Minister most closely associated with the 
       proposals and responsible for putting the matter before Cabinet.
            The decisiveness with which the Government has tackled the 
       wool industry problems in the past — the Deficiency Payments Scheme 
       and the Australian Wool Commission, both of which have proved their 
       value to the industry — makes it quite plain that we regard the 
      matter as highest priority.

                                  3.


            A decision will be made just as soon as the Government 
       is satisfied it has adequatelyexamined all aspects of the proposals 
       now before it.






            I turn now to another important aspect of our local economy -
       the question of unemployment. As you know, the Commonwealth 
III    has recognised the special problems of unemployment in country 
       areas, and has committed substantial sums of money to help overcome 
       them. At the Premiers' Conference last February, the Commonwealth 
       agreed to double the grants we were providing to the States to
       boost non—metropolitan employment. They now amount to $4.5 million 
       a month, a rate of $54 million a year.
            The States allocate the money to local government
       authorities and governmental and semi—governmental bodies to
       provide jobs for people outside the capital. city.
            While these enormous sums may sound impressive, it is only 
       when one relates them to our local situation that one appreciates 
       the impact they must be having in providing work for many people.
            Let me give an example or two of the total amounts allocated 
       by the Victorian Government in Wannon for this purpose so far. 
       Warrnambool City has received $39,900 and Warrnambool Shire $17,000. 
       Hamilton has received $36,950 and the Kowree Shire $10,200.
       In fact every local authority in Wannon has benefited from the 
       grants and the total disbursements to Wannon stand at more than 
       $264,000 so far.

                                4.

            It is vitally important for economic and social reasons 
       that reasonable employment prospects be maintained in our part
       of the country. The provision of these grants is just one other 
       example of the way in which the Commonwealth is determined to 
       support people who live in rural areas.

                            ocoo00000000

•
       For further information: Collin Myers
                                Telephone Canberra 73 3261





•

