<!--start metadata-->
Title: Home Savings Grant Scheme
Description: radio talk
Date: 14/06/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                           ~t121 - o Unuay 1-r u urie .
} DIO TALK                 3YB - Thursday 18 June.
    By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence
    In 1964 the Federal Government introduced its Home Savings Grant Scheme 
to encourage young people to save over a period of years for a home of their 
own when they marry. Couples and also widowed persons (with one or more 
dependent children) became eligible for a tax-free grant, depending how 
much they were able to put away in recognised savings over a period of three 
years. Applicants had to be under the age of 36 years. The amount of grant 
payable was $1 for every $3 in acceptable savings achieved. The maximum grant 
payable was $500 on savings of $1500 or more, but smaller grants - down to a 
minimum of $10 - were payable on lesser amounts saved. Since the scheme has 
been operating, the Commonwealth has paid out more than $74 million to over 
170,000 couples or widowed persons seeking to build or buy a home.
    Modifications to the scheme have recently become law. The changes to 
the scheme will permit more young people to qualify for a grant and allow 
others to receive larger grants by making eligible some savings which are 
excluded from the scheme at present. Previously the applicant for a grant 
was eligible only if the value of the home, including the value of the 
land involved, was not above $15,000. The new measures raise the limit to 
$17,500. Introducing the change, the Minister for Housing, Senator Dame 
Annabelle Rankin, said the new limit took into account the fact that homes 
cost more today. The most significant reason had been the rise in the value 
of residential land in manu cities and towns. Another reason was that the 
average cottage being built today for young families was much better equipped, 
and was therefore a much better home than the home of a few years ago.
    Under the original conditions, it was necessary for the applicant to 
hold savings with a bank in accounts clearly designated as "Home Savings 
Accounts", or in other acceptable forms. This designation of savings
accounts is not now mandatory. The Department of Housing will, however, 
continue to urge young people to open home savings accounts as such, because 
a passbook of this kind is a continuing reminder of the desirability of 
saving to own a home. In other words, the changes made will extend the forms 
of acceptable savings to include money held in savings bank accounts and on 
fixed deposit with trading banks that have not been designated as Home Savings 
Accounts. Explaining the change, the Minister said most of the young people 
who applied for a grant had held their savings in a designated bank account or 
in the other acceptable forms. But there were some who, even though they had 
been deliberately saving to obtain their own homes, had either not requested 
the bank to designate their accounts as home savings, or had failed to have 
this done for the minimum period of three years before taking steps to acquire 
their homes. Among these are many newcomers to Australia who had been unaware 
of the acceptable forms of saving until it was too late for them to become 
eligible for a grant.

                                                        2.
   Another amendment opens the scheme to divorced persons aged less than 36 years 
   with one or more dependent children. The three changes I have listed will apply 
   to applicants who entered into a contract to buy or build a home or, as an 
   owner—builder, commenced to build it on or after October 27 1969.
                The Home Savings Grant scheme has been widened in another way; savings 
   with approved credit unions are now eligible. The credit union involved has to 
   satisfy a number of conditions. Broadly, they are that a credit union regularly 
   makes a significant number of loans for the construction or purchase of homes, 
   and that these loans are comparable in size, interest terms and repayment 
   periods with those made by banks and building societies.
                The Minister invited all young people who had not previously applied 
   for a grant, and who considered they might become eligible under the new 
   conditions, to apply without delay to the Commonwealth Department of Housing in 
   their State. The growth of drug abuse throughout the world is a terrible and 
   insidious thing. It has occupied the minds of social workers, of civic 
   administrations, of governments to an increasing degree. One does not have to 
   turn the pages far in one's daily newspaper to find stories of degradation and 
   corruption of people due to the misuse or abuse of drugs of various kinds. It 
   is one of the grave problems of modern times.
                It is a matter, I think, for applause that the Federal Government is 
   taking firm steps to help to counter the spread of the drug sickness in this 
   country. In pursuit of this aim, the Commonwealth recently announced a grant 
   of half a million dollars to enable significant light to be thrown on the evil 
   of drug addiction in all its forms. The grant set aside by the Commonwealth is 
   earmarked for use during 1970-71 to launch a campaign to educate Australians in 
   the dangers involved in the use and abuse of drugs.
               There is a body called the Education Sub—Committee, which was set up
  by the National Standing Control Committee on Drugs of Dependence. This body 
  was approved at the Commonwealth and State Ministers' meeting on April 24 this 
  year. The funds made available will enable the Education Sub—Committee to 
  support and assist in co—ordinating existing education programs and to develop
  others.                                          -
               The Committee will be widely based, a strong committee comprised of 
  experts and community leaders as well as officers, of the government. The 
  Government representatives will include officers of the Department of Health, 
  Education and Science and Customs and Excise.
               There are law enforcement agencies which cut down the supply of drugs. 
  Smugglers and pedlars of drugs are caught and gaoled. But the Commonwealth 
  believes this does not go far enough. The community must be made aware of the 
  devastation that can result from the misuse of drugs. This is necessary to

Uri
                                               3.

    prevent the drug problem from assuming the proportions it has reached in other
    countries. And so the Government is taking the lead — supported by, and also 
    supporting the States — to expand the public's knowledge of the drug menace. 
    The Government acknowledges that there is a pressing need for an education 
    campaign. Announcing the assistance, the Ministers for Health and Customs and 
    Excise said the drug problem in Australia did not compare — as yet — with the 
    problems encountered in other countries, such as the U.S.A., but it was already 
    of a magnitude to cause concern. All available evidence suggested that drug 
    abuse in Australia was on the increase. Much work had already been done. The 
    Commonwealth Department of Health was preparing information such as booklets 
    and pamphlets, and a film on drug abuse was being made. The first of a series 
    of seminars had been held to help Commonwealth and State personnel to prepare 
    their education programs. The Commonwealth aimed to co—operate to the full 
    with State governments and other authorities in order to contain the drug peril.
              The new substantially reduced rates in the levy paid by woolgrowers 
    for research and promotion will become effective from 1 August this year. This 
    was announced by the Minister for Primary Industry when he introduced the Wool 
    Industry Bill 1970 into Parliament on May 21. It gives effect to the Government's 
    promise to halve the grower's levy while doubling the Government contribution 
    to research and promotion in the industry. It means a saving to growers of about 
    $1.20 a bale. Commencing on August 1, the growers levy is to be cut from two to 
    one per cent of the gross proceeds from the sale of shorn wool. The balance of 
    expenditure required is to be met by the Government, provided its contribution 
    does not exceed an average of $27 million a year.

