<!--start metadata-->
Title: State governments, Labor government
Description: electoral talk
Date: 28/09/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


Leader of the Opposition

FOR PRESS
                FOR SUNDAY SEPTEMBER 28, 1975 

                  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 2, 1975

       ELECTORAL TALK


Last week the Opposition Parties announced their joint policy 
for a new deal for state governments.
The Federalism policy will curb the power which Canberra 
has in recent years exerted over the states.

It will give these governments a right to their own income 
tax revenues. It will end the subservient status of 
governments forced to make a cap inhand approach to Canberra 
for their revenues.

Taxpayers will keep the advantage of one tax return, but 
there will be provision for the states to impose their own 
taxation, or to decide on their own rebates.

Taxpayers will know how much government is costing them, 
at state level and at federal level.

This is just one of the policies which we are developing to 
enable us to meet the problems and difficulties confronting 
us all, now and in the 1980's.

The crux of the crisis we are facing is the way in which 
governments have seized more and more power for themselves, 
at the expense of the rights of ordinary people.

This is going on all around the world. During the past three 
years in Australia, it has gone on at a desparate pace..

Government spending has more than doubled in the last three 
years.

Since Labor has come to power, most of us work another month 
a year for the government.

These huge funds have gone into an enormous increase in 
the power of government and the Public Service.

The government is taking a larger share of everybody's 
income than ever before.








Commonwealth Offices, 4 Treasury Place, Melbourne, Victoria 3002

            -3-

Our policies on industrial relations and federal state 
relations will get Australia moving in the same direction. 
We will soon be announcing our proposals in education and 
social security.

All our policies are part of a plan to put more power and 
choice back into the hands of the Australian people.

In the next election, Australians will have a clear choice.

We can go further down Labor's road of domination by 
politicians, a domination which they call socialism.

Or we can take at last a new road towards an Australia 
in which men and women can run their own lives. The 
purpose of government must be to help them achieve this.

The watchwords of the next Liberal Government will be 
freedom and concern for all Australians.

