<!--start metadata-->
Title: Federal election
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 26/11/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                3HA SUNDAY 26 NOVEMBER 
BROADCAST
                3YB~ WEDNESDAY 29 NOVEMBER
                3LK;


    This will be my last opportunity to speak to you before 
the Federal election. The last twelve or eighteen months have 
been pretty exciting ones. In fact, I can't remember a period in 
which I've enjoyed more the task of providing my weekly reports 
because there has been so much to talk about, so many new developments 
and initiatives - in welfare, rural matters, health, housing, 
decentralisation and of course my own particular area of responsibility, 
education.

    In this final talk before the election, I want to put to 
you in the broadest terms the nature of the choice you must now make - 
a choice of the greatest importance to your future and the future 
of Australia.

    In the last twenty years, there have been many difficulties 
we have had to tackle and overcome, particularly in the country areas, 
but I believe the next twenty years will confront us with even greater 
challenges. There's more to this choice than plumping for free 
enterprise or socialism, although that's a serious enough alternative 
for you to consider. As we advance through the seventies, our entire 
way of life is at stake.

    In defence, we must adjust to a new set of circumstances, 
not with complacency, not with what amounts to a contempt for
national security as if we no longer needed it. We must adjust with 
care and with strength. We can no longer depend on old allies like 
Britain for a substantial defence presence in the South-east Asian 
region. America, pre-occupied with internal and financial problems, 
is under pressure to withdraw from Asia. As the old certainties 
disappear, we must emphasise the importance of our own involvement 
in the affairs of our region - of the five-power defence arrangement 
with Signapore, Malaysia, New Zealand and Britain, of the ANSUZ 
treaty, the only treaty binding us formally to the United States. 
Instead of withdrawing behind our own shores waiting for events to 
occur, as some would have us do, we should be involved in the region 
so that we can play a major part in shaping its future.

    For the people of Wannon, the choice depends in large measure 
on rural policy.




                         .../2

                        - 2 -

            Just as important, it depends on rural performance. 
      Australians need a government within whose ranks there is a strong
      rural voice, and I think you will have to agree that within the present 
      government, rural interests are pretty well represented.
            Had it not been for decisive government action last year, 
      the wool industry would_ most likely have collapsed entirely in such 
      depressed circumstances.
            If prices had not improved, the Government would have faced 
      a pay-out of more than $200 million, and it was prepared to meet that 
      commitment in the interests of the wool industry and of Australia.
            Following the deficiency payments scheme and the Australian
•     Wool Commission which, I think it is generally agreed, has done a 
      magnificent job for the industry, the Government has established the 
      Australian Wool Corporation to recommend ways of improving the
      marketing of wool.
            Provided it is commercially sound, the Corporation is
      empowered to recommend a scheme for the acquisition of the entire 
      Australian wool clip.
            The Liberal/Country Party Government understands the ways 
      and the problems of Australia's rural community, and it has demonstrated 
      its concern with this kind of action.
            In education, the choice is a clear one - between a 
      Government dedicated to assist all children in all schools to have
•     the best education possible, a Government committed to maintaining 
      freedom of choice in education with maximum State and local control 
      and influence in the running of Australian schools and colleges.
            The last year or two have witnessed unprecedented develop- 
     ments in education, and you know that I am talking about - vastly 
      expanded finaicial assistance to the States, huge new programmes for 
      school building, both Government and independent, a rapid growth in 
      the number of Commonwealth scholarships, new dimensions in our 
     assistance for teacher education. Soon we will open up further horizons 
     with a $75 million commitment to pre-school education throughout 
     Australia, special assistance to the handicapped and disadvantaged 
     children, more help for technical training, extension of our science 
     and library block schemes to include primary school libraries, and 
     subsidies for children in isolated areas out of reach of normal schools.


                                             •••/3

                                                                                -3

                                       The alternative is a centralised system of education based 
                 in Canberra so that the affairs of Australia's 10,000 schools will 
                 pass from the hands of States, local people and independent school 
                 authorities, into the hands of a huge bureaucratic machine in the 
                 national capital.
                                       Independent schools, would loose the guarantees for the 
                 future we have provided by having assistance based on a proportion 
                 of Government school costs.
                                       A number of issues have, of course, emerged in the campaign, 
                 and I have mentioned a few of them. Finally, I would like to deal 
                 with a very basic one.
                                       There are many people who think we are already over-
                 governed.
                                       Yet in his Policy Speech, Mr Whitlam said he would establish 
                 at least 19 new Commissions, Tribunals and Departments. This con- 
                 centration of power in Canberra would result in an enormously 
                 increased public service. His 'government by commission' would be 
                 government by a secret bureaucracy subtracting from the independence 
                 of State Governments, and from the authority of Federal Parliament 
                 itself.
                                       While Ministers are responsible for departments and are 
                 subject to daily questioning and scrutiny in Parliament, Chairmen of 
                 independent statutory commissions are not subject to that kind of
•                thing.
                                       Mr Whitlam would cost the tax-payer money, but he would cost 
                 them more than that.
                                       His bureaucratic initiatives promise Government intrusion
                 at its worst and centralisation at its most extreme and severe.
                                       Progress, national security, individual liberty and freedom 
                 of choice in all things, concern and compassion for the disadvantaged 
                 and underprivileged in our community, a stable and healthy rural 
                 community, an equal chance in life for all children, the preservation 
                 of our way of life, our traditional family values - these are the 
                 issues I believe are at stake in this election, and these are the 
                 things that I know you will weigh most carefully when you cast your 
                 vote next Saturday.
                                       Goodbye for now.
                                                             •  •   • •   •  •   • •   • •    • •   •  •

