<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence policy
Description: press statement
Date: 1/05/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT                                     May lst,1960
 MALCOLM FRASER:              DEFENCE POLICY
              Just before Easter the Minister for Defence announced the 
 progress which has been made in the re-organization of the Australian
 Defence Forces,   The most important changes affect the Army, but 
 significant changes have also been introduced in relation to the Navy. 
              The Fleet Air Arm will be scrapped after the present front
 line aircraft are worn out in the middle of 1963.   Later aircraft to 
 operate from carriers and which would be needed at any carrier warfare in 
 the future are extremely expensive and could not operate from the H.M.A.S. 
MELBOURNE, our present aircraft carrier. A replacement carrier of a 
more modern type and suitable to modern aircraft is not available, and 
the construction of a new carrier could not be entertained very largely
because of considerations of cost.    Furthermore, it may be doubtful if 
a small Navy such as Australia's can justify tying up such a large 
proportion of its capabilities in one vessel, A number of new naval 
projects are being considered which will replace the H.M.A.S. MELBOURNE 
when the MELBOURNE is eventually retired. These include the possible 
introduction of a submarine force, guided weapon destroyers, modern mine
sweepers and other proposals.    In the meantime, the Navy is concentrating 
on new types of anti-submarine frigates, four of which are at present 
being built in Australian shipyards.
              The main change as regards the Army involves the abandon- 
ment of National Service Training. As you will remember National Service 
Training was drastically reduced two or three years ago when it was 
decided to only accept 12,000 national service trainees in each year. 
One of the main reasons for the abandonment of national service training 
is the changed strategic concept. Ten years ago the best advice available 
to the Government from our own Chiefs of Staff and from overseas thought 
that if a war was going to happen at all a global war was the most likely. 
Now the experts believe because of the nuclear deterrent that if a war 
is to occur in any part of the world it is more likel y to be a local or 
limited war. As a result of this changed outlook it is felt that a 
small and effective force that can be used quickly is more valuable than
a larger force that will take longer to get into the field. Furthermoretional

                             ~ 2 WI!
 service training made demands on trained army manpower and money and 
 administrative effort which prejudiced the building up of regular combat 
 units and the purchase of modern equipment. hen involved in the training 
 of national service trainees could not be formed into modern efficient 
 combat units. The abandonment of national service training will make 
 it possible to increase the strength of the field force and to re—organise 
 the field force to improve its tactical flexibility in operations, The 
 strength of the operational forces of the regular army will be increased 
 by 33%, with a corresponding reduction in the administrative support forces. 
 This represents a very considerable saving in manpower. In addition to 
 the strengthening of the regular forces it is hoped to increase the number 
 in the G.A.F. to 30,000, all volunteers with considerably improved 
 operational effectiveness. The Citizen Military Forces will be provided 
 with more modern types of equipment for their training which will be 
 integrated as far as possible with that of the regular unite.
              The new Army is going to have a completely different frame- 
 work from the old. There is not time here to give details of this 
 framework, but if any one is particularly interested in the re--organization 
 of the Army if they write to me I will be very happy to give them all the 
 details. In addition to the re—organization of the Army, the Army have 
 been supplied with most modern equipment available in Australia and 
 overseas. Details of this equipment are also available to those who 
 are particularly interested in this subject.
              So far as the Air Force is concerned an order has been 
 placed for twelve Neptune Maritime Reconnaissance Aircraft to re—arm the 
 present Lincoln Squadron. The Squadron will be located at Townsville. 
 The technical team has been conferring on details of the purchase of a 
Bristol Bloddhound Mark I Surface to Air Guided `Weapons Unit. A fourth 
 permanent Fighter Squadron will be established, and this was formed at
 illiamtown early in January. It has been decided to re—equip the 
R,A.A.F. with a new type of fighter aircraft to replace the Sabre, but 
 at the present time full details are not available on the two or three 
 or four types which are under consideration. Since the new fighter will 
have to last this country for a considerable time, and since the decision 
will be one involving a very great deal of expense it is important that

                               3

all possible aircraft be examined before the decision is finally 
made. Durin, the last ten years 540 aircraft have been delivered to
the R.A.A.F., 400 of these have been built in Australia. These 
aircraft represent the greatest capital expense for any of the three 
services over the last ten years.
           Of necessity this is an extremely brief outline of 
detailed and complex proposals. If anyone is particularly interested 
in this aspect of Government policy I would be very happy indeed to 
send them full details of the latest changes to the Australian Defence 
Forces. These changes are up—to—date and in concert with what our 
Allies are doing in other countries. They will mean that Australia 
is able to make an ever more effective contribution to the mutual 
security of South Last Asia.

