<!--start metadata-->
Title: Aborigines
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 14/07/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                           3HA - 14th July 
                                           3YB - 17th July

                     AB()RIGT.N

             By Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.
                      411=11111111111.1_._.._

           It is unfortunate that the problem of the ;ustralian

aboriginal has been made the plaything of politics. To put the 

record atsaight I want to gigs this story from the beginning and it is

a story of fact.

           The Commonwealth x:arliament constitutionally is responsible 

for the natives in the Northern Territory and in Central 'uetralie and 

I want to tell you tonight what has been dome to help them find their 

true place in our society. The principles the Co©aonwealth has adopted 

are based on the final assimilation of the ^ustralian aborigines into 

the %uropean community and, secondly, on solving the administrative 

problem of helpint them to live happily and usefully in our society.

            Aborigines in the Iorthein territory are from birth

recognised as ustralian citizens and only those who are committed 

by name as wards of this Mato are temporarily deprived full citizen 

rights. Their commfttal us wards is subject to appeal. This is the 

same basic idea that is expressed in social legislation applying to all

 those who must be protected by the State, for instance neglected 
children.

            The Northern Territory administration for the wards

 committed to its care tries to promote their social and economic advance- 

 ment and wellbeing, to arrange for their education, including vocational 

 training, to detect, prevent and cure disease and to obtain employment 

 amongst many other things designed to help the aborigines.

            At the present there are 6,504 aborigines in agriculture, 

 pastoral and mining Wens, 5,000 in touch with mission settlements, 

 3,500 in touch with Goverinment settlements and 600 nomadic natives with 

 whom it is difficult to maintain contact, such as were the ones in the

 Warburton Ranges.

            It is suite clearly the nomadic natives who suffer the most 

 if they are overtaken by drought or one thing or another. Contrary to 

 what has been said, the natives found in the Warburton ianues have not 

 been forced from their traditional surrounding grounds. They were 

 nomadic natives who will stay inns one place more than a few days and 

 unless they are to be forced to remain near a mission, it is impossible 

 to give them the full treatme;Lt that they require. I do not really 

 think that we should force them to give up their nomadic habits.

     There are at present 17 reservesh a total area of 67,000 
square miles At mum* these reserves, care, attention and food, 
and later education facilities and health work, ere provided on behalf 
of the natives. There are 13 Government settlements and 12 Mission 
settlements established throughout the Territory. From these settlements 
patrols go out to other areas. Through these settlements much work is 
done in aiding assimilation.
     Contrary again to what has been said, reservew cannot be 
reduced just at the Minister's whim. They can only be reduced b. the 
decision of the Government with the approv1 of the Comonwealth
Parliament,
     If any mineral discovery is made on a reserve, the aborigines 
stand to benefit for by legislation introduced by this Government, a 
special royalty must be paid on any minerals found on an aboriginal 
reserve to a fund to be applied for the benefit of aborigines.
     f‘borigines who are not wards of the ;tote are regarded as 
having the same industrial rights as any other worker and it is assumed 
that those rights will be advanced and protew.ed in the same way as thos
of other Australian workers.
     For the wards of this &tate a great deal has been done on 
the lines that I have indicated - medical care and health and helping 
towards assimilation, ead—imagintrtiVrikettr education and in the finding
of employment.
     Since 1948/49 - the last year of Labor rule - expenditure . 
on these measures has increased from f.70108 to Z525,000 this year. 
These figures do not include enlaries of administrative staff or the 
expenditure on capital works. They don't include expenditure on healZh 
services or other services in the Territory in which aborigines 
participate on the same footing as Europeans. This applies to all 
hospitals in the Territorr that are available for both Europeans and
aborigines.
     The efforts of the Mission settlements are also being increase 
by Government grants which tram 1948/49 totalled £16,788 and which this
year totalled 2184,650,

                       IMP



       In 1948 there were 1214185i= schools for the teaching

of aboriginal children with 670 pupils. There are now 12 Govern 

Rant schools with an attendance of 600 pupils, 3 schools on pastoral

properties with 40 pupils and 13 Jission schools with an attendance 

of 1,000. The policy is to bring education to every aboriginal

child.

       The ComLonwealth Government is Joing a vi,ry great deal to

help the aborigines under its care, and saying anything to the
contrary is totally untrue. Much of the publicity in recent months 

has concerned the welfare of aborigines in certain States, particularly

Western lustralia. Constitutionally their welfare is solely in the 

hands of the States which must accept their responsibility if they

wish to remain an important and integral part of the Australian
Commonwealth.   They cannot continually wash their hands of

problems as they arise and say it is a Federal matter when in truth

it is not.






lo/7/1957




                  The subject of next weld; article will be 
                    the Comu.onwealth conference.

