<!--start metadata-->
Title: Aid to Pakistani refugees, assistance for nursing home patients, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Description: Radio talk
Date: 10/10/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                      (1c o-1,. ciko,a



     RADIO TALK     Sunday, 10th October, 1971.
                    Thursday, 14th October, 1971.





          Today I want to talk about three things - 
     about additional aid to East Pakistani refugees, about 
     additional assistance for nursing home patients and about 
     the work of the C.S.I.R.O.


          There has been a great deal of attention given 
     to the tragic problems in the Indian sub-continent. These 
~    problems have arisen out of differences between East and 
     West Pakistan. This had led to a flood of East Pakistani 
     refugees moving into India. This has presented India with 
     a great and difficult problem. These difficulties have
     caught the imagination and sympathy of many people in 
     Australia. The problems have been highlighted by the silent 
     fasting vigil of people sitting on the G.P.O. steps in 
     Melbourne and then going to Canberra and resuming their vigil 
     there in front of Parliament House. Many individuals have 
     spoken to me about it and have written. I was more than glad, 
     therefore, when the Minister for Foreign Affairs announced 
     a doubling of Australian aid to East Pakistani refugees to a 
     total of $3 million. The aid will be provided in the form of 
 •   rice, some given directly to India for the refugees and some 
     for distribution through United Nations agencies, to be 
     distributed in East Pakistan itself. It is a problem that 
     should stir the world.


          Last week the Prime Minister announced substantial 
     additional support for nursing home patients. The Prime 
     Minister pointed out that the number of nursing home patients 
     has increased from 33,000 to 47,000 over the last five years. 
     He pointed out that support for nursing home patients
     amounted to nearly $50 million in the last financial year. 
     A number of these nursing homes have been running into 
     problems because of steep increases in costs, especially in

                               2.



     nurses' salaries. As an interim measure, the Government 
     therefore decided that benefits for patients receiving 
     ordinary nursing home care would be increased from $2.00 
     to $3.50 per day, or $24.50 a week. Benefits for patients 
     receiving intensive care would also be increased by $1.50 
     a day to $45.50 a week. The sums don't sound very great 
     perhaps, but they are put into context when you realise that 
     they will cost $24 million in a full year.


         This action has been taken in pursuit of the 
     Government's policy of assisting the sick and the aged where 
•    areas of need appear. Nursing home benefits are but one of 
     the provisions made to help aged persons. Assistance is 
     given in other ways- in the pension and related payments, 
     assistance with aged persons' housing and assistance provided 
     through the home care programme. I emphasise again that this 
     is an interim measure and will take effect as soon as the 
     necessary legislation is passed by Parliament.


         Last week I also tabled the Annual Report for the 
     Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. 
     This organization is continuing to undertake a great deal of 
     work which should be of benefit to people in the country. The 
     organization is playing a central role in important industrial 
•    trials of new equipment and testing techniques to enable wool 
     to be sold on the basis of objective tests and samples. The 
     C.S.I.R.O.'s automatic wool coring machine is an important 
     part of the tests. If these tests are successful, they should 
     hasten a dramatic change in the marketing of the Australian 
     clip - a change which many people believe is much. overdue. 
     The C.S.I.R.O. Department of Animal Health has discovered 
     that cattle can act as carriers of foot rot and pass it on to 
     sheep. It now appears that this apparent cross infection 
     between cattle and sheep could be significant in the case of 
     other important stock diseases. Laboratory tests have shown 
     that another organism which appears harmless to cattle can be

                            3



     passed on to sheep and cause lesions in lambs or still births. 
     Sheep have been found to be carriers of a cattle virus. The 
     sheep show no symptoms at all but readily transmit the
     disease to cattle in contact with them. These researches 
     will have significant implications for farmers who run both 
     sheep and cattle.


         In February of this year, permanent press wool 
     slacks and trousers that can be machine washed and drip dried 
     or tumble dried without shrinkage or logs of shape, went on 
     the Australian market for the first time. The process was 
     developed by the Division of Textile Industry of the C.S.I.R.O. 
•    At the moment, production capacity limits the process to 
     slacks and trousers but experiments have been undertaken to 
     extend the process to shirts, blouses, skirts, tunics and 
     other woollen clothes.


         If anyone would like a copy of the C.S.I.R.O. 
     Annual Report, which has a great deal of interesting 
     information in it, they could write to me and I will send 
     them a copy.






•

