<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: press statement
Date: 22/08/1965
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


.PRESS STATEMENT :


 MALCOLM FRASER :

                                                   August 22nd, 1965


                         THE BUdGET_....,._._._


                  At the outset it will probably be useful to underline 
 the major objectives of the budgetary policy. The Budget is the Govern- 
 ment's major weapon in guiding the overall development of Australia; in 
 maintaining a balanced economy and in making sure that economic justice
 prevails between different sections of the community. The Budget must 
 guard against inflation on the one hand and prevent deflation and 
 unemployment on the other.

                  It has now become a well-established principle that in 
 times of unemployment the Government will spend more money than it 
 receives in revenues in any one year, thus giving a stimulus to the 
 economy by putting more money into circulation. On the other hand, if 
 there is inflation; if prices are rising; if there are many more jobs than 
 there are men available to fill them, then the Government's purpose is to 
 take money out of circulation by collecting more revenue than it spends 
 which can do great damage to the economy as a whole.

                  At the present time, Australia's economic resources are 
 stretched pretty tightly. Unemployment has been at consistently very
 low levels for quite some time.   There are some signs of inflation and
 of shortages of labour in certain industries.  In addition to this, our 
 overseas reserves fell by over £15OM in the last financial year. Even 
 though our reserves are still extremely high, this rate of rundown cannot 
 be allowed to continue indefinitely. Under these circumstances, it is 
 clear that the 1965/66 Budget should be one that would not create additional 
 pressures; that would not unduly expand demand for goods and services. 
 If it did it would clearly be inflationary.

                  If other things had not intervened, it would have been 
 a good year for the Commonwealth to hold its expenditure as steadily as 
 possible but, unfortunately, many matters have occurred - some of them 
 quite beyond our control -.which have made it necessary to finance a record 
 increase in Commonwealth expenditure this year.

                  Total Commonwealth expenditure will increase by £275M. 
 This was the year in which various financial agreements with the States 
 were re-negotiated and, as a result, Commonwealth payments for State 
 works and housing programs will increase by over £69M. in this year, 
 Social Services and Repatriation benefits will increase by £38M.
 Although other expenditure will also rise by far the largest increase 
 is that for the Defence Services which will be over £SOM. This brings
 Australian Defence spending to £385M. About four years ago, Defence 
 spending was running not much more than £200L. a year. Next year it 
 is probable, indeed almost certain, that Defence spending will again 
 increase on the existing Defence program. If we decide to buy additional 
 planes for the Air Force or additional units for the Navy or expand 
 further the size of the Army, the cost will be that much greater.

                  This is the item, of course, that has been forced upon 
 us by external events which are outside our control; which have been 
 forced upon us by the necessity to play a proper part in maintaining our 
 own security and that of other independent nations in our part of the 
 world.

                  While Commonwealth expenditure is increasing by £27511, 
 it is unlikely that total receipts from revenue and other sources will

                                                                 /2

                 2


increase by more than £225M over last year, leaving a gap of some £50M. 
between the increase in expenditure and the increase in revenue.

         If this had been financed as technically as it could 
have been by borrowing from the Reserve Bank the result in the present 
state of the economy would have been extremely inflationary with 
consequent harm to people on fixed incomes, and to all those who must 
sell their products on the export market. Thus the Commonwealth rightly 
felt it necessary to impose additional taxation which will bring in an 
additional £72M. in this year. As a result, this will leave the 
Commonwealth with a surplus in its total accounts of about £19M, which 
is not very much in an overall budget of over £2,600M. The Budget, 
therefore, should have a mild, steadying effect on the economy.
Lower wool prices arid drought in many parts of Australia will add to 
the anti—inflationary forces. This restraining influence will be 
further re—inforced by the fact that a significant part of the increased 
Defence Vote will be spent overseas in buying the most modern and 
efficient equipment available to us.

         This, then, is the Budget in broad outline. We have 
a Commonwealth expenditure, largely as a result of increased payments 
to the States and especially of increased payments for Defence purposes. 
In view of the tendencies towards inflation that are already present, it 
has become necessary to raise additional revenue through increased 
taxation, especially so to finance the Defence Vote. From the
reactions I have heard from many people, I believe the increases in 
taxation are less onerous than many people expected.





                -000--------

