<!--start metadata-->
Title: Current situation in the wool industry
Description: radio talks
Date: 1/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


7

           CURRENT SITUATION IN THE WOOL INDUSTRY
  RADIO SPEECH
  MALCOLM FRASER             1 September 1967



       Over the last few months Western Victoria has experienced the 
  worst season on record. Rainfall records for Hamilton have been kept for 
  98 years and this is the 99th. Up till June of this year Portland and 
  Hamilton districts have had the dryest six months on record.
       As a result, things have been made a good deal more difficult, 
  not only for people who live directly on the land but for all those who 
  supply goods and services to farmers. When people talk of droughts and 
  their effect, they always think of the direct impact of this on the farmer. 
  They do not always have quite so much thought for the person who lives in 
  the town and whose livelihood is dependant on a prosperous farming community. 
  Machinery firms, garages, grocers, all feel it in a season of this kind. The 
  season would have been a good deal more bearable if wool prices had not been
  the worst for a very long while, Since the wool boom of 1950/51 wool prices 
  have varied a good deal. There have been three or four years in which the 
  lowest price was lower than the July average for this year but these occasions 
  were accompanied by good seasons, This year we have the unhappy conjunction 
  of a very bad season and very low prices.
       Over the last few days I have looked into some of the factors that
  affect the prices in the wool market and there is nothing to give cause for 
  optimism in the immediate future. The European countries are wrestling 
  with internal economic recession and the UK faces the prospect of a quite 
  major depression, with over 550,000 people unemployed. In the last day or 
  two we have seen reports of their Cabinet reshuffle and Prime Minister Wilson 
  has now taken the control of the British economy into his own hands. In 
  Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands the wool textile industry is 
  depressed. Italy is the only one of the Common Market countries in which 
  the textile industry has had a good year. Wool consumption in the US 
  showed a sharp downward trend in the last nine months of 1966. This position 
  may have been halted in the first figures available for this year.
       In general terms the latest ccnsumption figures indicate a downward
  trend during 1966. Total consumption for the year disguises the trend 
  because consumption was high for the first two quarters. It fell steeply 
  however, in the last half of the year and ended being 10% less than in the 
  earlier period.
       One of the factors that must have influenced the market for wool,
  is the quite drastic fall in the prices of the main synthetic fibres. In 
  the United Kingdom, in three adjustments since 1962, Terylene prices have 
  fallen by 42%, Nylon by 25% and Acrilan by 19%. In the United States 
  Dacron prices have been reduced by 49% over the same period. The latest 
  reductions in Nylon and Terylene prices occurred in June of this year. 
  Dacron prices in America were reduced substantially in May of this year.

r  r

                        2.


      These very substantial reductions are the result of intense competition in 
      the synthetic industry which has been reinforced by the large number of 
      manufacturers entering the market. For a good many years the price of 
      synthetic fibres was held fairly constant because patents restricted the 
      number of manufacturers, but this is no longer the case.
           Two other factors have also influenced the situation. I.New Zealand 
      bought in over 645,000 bales of wool last year, or 37% of the total 
      offerings at New Zealand auctions. This wool is still in store and of 
      course, is unsold. I have a breakup of wool purchased for stock between 
      July of 1966 and February of 1967 and it is interesting to note that only 
      1% of this was 56's or finer. 88% of it was 46/50's or coarser, so there 
      are very large quantities of strong wool held in New Zealand stores.
      2.   Lack of confidence in the Auction has, in my view, also clearly 
      affected price. During the debates on the last floor price scheme it was 
      pointed out on more than one occasion that when the market breaks and when 
      there is a likelihood of a general fall in price, every buyer immediately 
      lowers his limits, every manufacturer lowers his limits, and thus the 
      expectation of a fall in price leads to an actual fall in price. Nobody would 
      ever be able to estimate how much a different marketing system might have 
      changed the present circumstances, but I can only say that the last few 
      months have certainly not altered my own views which should be well known.
           In October of this year the Marketing Committee of the Wool Board 
      will be making its report. Experience of the past has led us not to 
      expect any magic wand but many woolgrowers will be looking to this report 
      to see what it recommends, to see what prospects it holds for the future.
           I know that at least one of the major grower organisations has 
      indicated that it does not want to enter into debate on this question until 
      the new Marketing Report is published but I would hope that the industry may 
      still examine some of the other avenues which are open to it. The Wool 
      Industry Conference has been established and the major woolgrowing organisations 
      are members of it. I would hope that the question of costs and of returns would 
      be discussed in the Conference. The machinery of the Australian Wool Industry 
      Conference has still not been used to its greatest possible effect by the 
      Industry. This is the forum from which to put joint views, with strength, to 
      the Government. I hope the industry will use it. I also hope that the industry 
      as a whole might seek a way of putting its own view, either by itself or in 
      co—operation with other exporting industries, when the question of wages is under 
      discussion in the Arbitration Court.
           I mentioned both these matters at the wool meeting that was held in 
      Hamilton some time ago and I know that this second suggestion had a somewhat 
      mixed reception. I still believe that representation of the industry in these 
      matters should not be left to one organisation out of three, and I also believe 
      that the industry should put the case for the exporting employers as opposed to 
      combining with the general employers, most of whom are concerned with industries
      that do not have to sell their products on the world markets.

 DRAFT                                   31 August 1967

 RADIO SPEECH



        Today, want to make a few comments about one or two

 difar t. b• ts. Over the last few months 'Western Victoria has
                                        for Hamilton
 experienced the worst season on record. Rainfall records/have been
       98
 kept for Ofi years and this is the 9'9th. Up till June of this year

Portland and Hamilton districts have had the dryest six months on record. 

Igor June 45 points of rain at Hamilton, for July 269, August 3397






        As a result, things have been made a good deal more difficult 

 not only for people who live directly on the land but for all those 

 who supply goods and services to farmers. When people talk of droughts 

 and their effect, they always think of the dirdct impact of this on the 

 farmer. They zi: do not always have quite so much thought for the 

person who lives in the town and whose livelihood is dependant on a 

prosperous farming community. Machinery firms, garages, grocers, all 

feel it in a season of this kind. The season would have been a good 

deal more bearable if wool prices had not been the worst for a very 

long while. Since the wool boom of 1950/51 wool prices have varied 

a good deal. There have been three or four years in which the lowest 

price was lower than the July average for this year but these occasions 

were accompanied by good seasons. This year we have the unhappy 

conjunction of a very bad season and very low prices.

        Over the last few days I have looked into some f the factors 

that affect the prices in the wool market and there is nothing to give 

cause for optimism in the immediate future. The European countries are 

wrestling with internal economic recession and the UK faces the prospect 

of a quite major depression, with over 550,000 people unemployed. In the 

last day or two we have seen reports of their Cabinet reshuffle and

Prime Minister Wilson has now taken the control of the British economy 

into his own hands. In Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands 

the wool textile industry is depressed. Italy is the only one of the 

Common Market countries in which the textile industry has had a good 

year. Wool consumption in the US thowed a sharp downward trend in the 

last nine months of 1966. This position may have been halted in the

first figures available for this year.


                                                  ../2

                            - 2 -


                                 consumption
          In general termsthe latest/figures indicate a rard
                   .~--
 trend during 1966. 


             ~ ~ 1:_,,Q,,$) (A-Ae_

                                                       ...-12/2,-/~ ;








                                 J

          One of the factors that must have influenced the market for 


wool, is the uite drastic fal1.1 in the prices of the main synthetic


fibres. In three adjustments since 1962, Terylene prices have fallen 
      n

by 42%, Nylon by 25% and Acrilan by 19%. In the United States Dacron prices


hame been reduced by 49% over the same period. The latest reductions


in nylon and Terylene prices occurred in June of this year. Dacron


prices in America were reduced substantially in May of this year.


          These very substantial reductions are the result of intense


competition in the synthetic industry which has been reinforced by the


large number of manufacturers entering the market. For a good many


years the price of synthetic fibres was held fairly constant because


patents restricted the number of manufacturers, but this is no longer


the case.                                                  (1)

          Two other factors have also influenced the situation./ New 


Zealand bought in over 645,000 bales of wool last year, or 37% of the 


total offerings at New Zealand auctions. This wool is still in store 


and of course is unsold. I have a breakup of wool purchased for stock 


between July of 1966 and February of 1967, and it is interesting 


to note that only 1% of this was 56's or finer. 88% of it was 46/50's


or coarser, so there are very large quantities of strong wool held in 


New Zealand stores.


(2)       Lack of confidence in the Auction has, in my view, also


clearly affected price. During the debates on the last floor price 


scheme it was pointed out on more than one occasion that when the market 


breaks and when there is a likelihood of a general fall in price, 


everyÌkzsgx buyer immediately lowers his limits, every manufacturer



lowers his limits, and thus the expectation of a fall in price leads

    to an actual fall in price. Nobody would ever be able to estimate 

    how much a different marketing system might have changed the present 

    circumstances, but I can only say that the last few months have 

    certainly not altered my own views which should be well known.

              In October of this year the Marketing Committee of the

    Wool Board will be making its report. Experience of thetpast has
                                               CALANc.7
    p rhaN            ^is leg(d us not to expect +o        f Ath s
                       .   • I • •-___   r       — -
    but many woolgrowers will be looking to this report to wee what it 

    recommends, to see what prospects it holds for the future.

              I know that at least one of the majo organisations has 
    indicated that it does not want to enter into debate on this question 

   until the new Marketing Report is published but I would hope that the 

   industry may still examine some of the other avenues which are open 

   to it. The 'Wool Industry Conference has been established and the 

   major woolgrowing organisations are members of it. I would hope that the 

   questipn/pf costs and of returns would be discussed in the Conference,
r  also that the industry as a whole might seek a way of putting its own 
       n
   view, either by itself or in co-operation with other exporting industries

   when the question of wages is under discussionti

              I mentioned both these matters at the wool meeting that was 

   held in Hamilton some time ago and I know that this second suggestion 
   had a somewhat mixed reception. I still believe that representation of 

   the industry in these matters should not be left to one organisation 

   out of three, and I also believe that the industry should put the case 

   for the exporting employers as opposed to combining with the general 

   employers, most of whom are concerned with industries that do nothav

     to sell their products on the world markets. The machinery of the 

   Conference has still not been used to its greatest possible effect by

   the industry. This is the forumfmaa which to put joint views, with

   strength, to the Government. I hope the industry will use it.

