<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor industrial relations policy, Arbitration Commission, John Curtin House
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 1/12/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


064 ELECTORAL STATEMENTEMBARGO: 6.00 p.m. 1.12.74

          THE HON. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASER 
              GOVERNMENT PRESSURE

    Mr Jones to resign?

    I want to talk about arbitrary and irresponsible Government. Last 
    week I think I mentioned the fact that the Government's industrial 
    relations policy had been torn up by Mr Jones.

    There is another chapter in relation to that because there was an 
    arbitrated decision which would have given a 17% increase to TAA 
    pilots. It appeared that under pressure from Mr Hawke the Prime 
    Minister has ordered that that be increased to about 24%, the same 
    increase as was negotiated for the ANSETT pilots.

    I understand Mr Hawke has suggested that the Minister for Transport,
    Mr Jones, ought to resign. There are good grounds for him resigning
    or being removed to a different port folio where he would be unlikely
    to aggravate industrial relations' problems. However, I believe
    that it would be wrong for the Prime Minister to remove Mr Jones
    at the suggestion and direction of Mr Hawke, President of the A.C.T.U.,
    because I do not believe that any Prime Minister should give in to
    directions from outside the Parliament.

    There are a number of areas where Mr Hawke has told the Government 
    what it must do and there are a number of occasions on which Mr 
    Whitlam has reacted. It could almost be said Mr Hawke is de facto 
    Prime Minister of Australia and that Mr Whitlam is captive of the 
    President of the A.C.T.U. I do not believe that this is good for 
    Australia.

    This is one kind of pressure which leads to bad Government - pres- 
    sure by an outside body on the elected Parliamentary representative 
    of Australia.

    Pressure on the Arbitration Commission

    The Government itself has been guilty of putting pressure on an indep- 
    endent body - it has been putting a great deal of pressure on the 
    Arbitration Commission. It did this on the Qantas pilots' case. 
    There was a great deal of criticism as a result of an earlier det- 
    ermination concerning Air Hostesses and I have been advised that 
    the Commissioner who normally looks after the Air Hostesses' award 
    has been removed to another area and that has in fact been admitted 
    by the Minister for Transport.

    One of the valued things about the Arbitration Commission is its

                                 ../2

                            2.

independence. That needs protecting by the quality of people 
who are appointed to the Commission. In the past their terms of 
appointment have been until retirement and that is similar to judges. 
This gives the people concerned an independence to act as they be- 
lieve right in accordance with the law. If pressure were put upon 
such people they could resist it, but now we have had an admission 
by the Minister for Transport that a certain Commissioner was re- 
moved, put into another job, and we have the announced policy of 
the Minister for Labour that the terms of Commissioners would be 
limited to a fixed period of 3 to 5 years.

Once you have a fixed period of this time for Commissioners of the 
Arbitration Commission and once you have that coupled with the 
kind of public pressure that is being put upon them by this Govern- 
ment,you would have a tame cat Commission thatwould be merely 
an administrative arm of Government designed to do what the Govern- 
ment itself wants. That would destroy the Commission and everything 
it has stood for since its establishment. It would be distrastrous 
for industrial relations in Australia. It would be the direct con- 
sequence of the present Government's policies.

John Curtin House and the Commissioner of Taxation

There is a third example where pressure may have well have had some 
part to play in a decision that has been made. Whether it has or 
not I do not know and I would certainly not make charges of that 
kind but a question has been raised and the question needs resolution 
in the clearest possible terms.

I think many of us have heard that John Curtin House is going to 
be built in Canberra as the National headquarters of the Australian 
Labour Party. I believe that virtually every Australian citizen 
would believe that political headquarters ought to be paid for by 
the political party concerned or by its supporters. I know this 
happened with John McEwen House in Canberra but with the building 
of John Curtin House we are likely to have a different set of 
circumstances.

I have a photostat of a letter to a Mr T. Kavanagh who is Secretary 
of the John Curtin House Appeal. It is dated 28th October, 1974 
and is signed by J.W. Curtin, First Assistant Commissioner of Tax- 
ation.

The third paragraph of the letter says that"large business organ- 
isations often make donations as a form of advertising and in this 
situation deductions would ordinarily be allowable in terms of 
Section 51. In view of the wide-spread publicity which it is 
proposed to give donors"(i.e. to the John Curtin House Appeal) "it 
is thought that tax payers carrying on business operations would 
have little difficulty in establishing that the gifts were made
                           ../3

