<!--start metadata-->
Title: Sickness and politicians
Description: press statement
Date: 2/09/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT: 

MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                    September 2nd,1962


                         SICKNESS AND POLITICIANS


               If the average person was asked why Governments fail, they 
would probably say because they are defeated at elections or because they 
are defeated over some major measure in the Parliament, implying that a 
former supporter of the Government had changed his opinion about that 
support. These are probably the classic reasons why Governments fail. 
But the last week in the Parliament was one that made the Government Whips
exceedingly nervous for an entirely different reason. 'Flu, bronchitis, 
broken noses and glandular fever - which some people reported as mumps, 
seemed suddenly to attack the Government members and there was a period of 
10 minutes when the Government did not have a majority.

               If a Government lost its majority for any reason over a
really vital measure, the Government could be defeated, It may be 
interesting therefore to have a look at the various reasons which could 
bring this about.

               About two weeks ago, Gordon Freeth, Minister for the Interior, 
son of a West Australian Bishop, ex-Service heavyweight boxing champion, 
also an oarsman of international reputation, and Billy Snedden from the 
metropolitan area of Melbourne, had a game of squash. It may be said that 
Billy Snedden didn't have a chance because he is only a barrister and an
energetic and virile member of the Liberal Party in Victoria. In any case, 
he came out of the game of squash with a severely broken nose. He managed 
to survive to stand with the Government's majority for the remainder of the 
week but then, early in the following week he had to go into hospital to 
have a minor operation on his nose and his absence, amongst others, led to 
the Government being without a majority for a short time.

               Jim Killen, a most personable and enthusiastic Liberal from 
Queensland (you may already have heard of him because he went across to 
England to try and persuade Great Britain not to join the Common Market, 
an activity with which I did not agree) has been absent the whole week 
because of severe 'flu which turned into bronchial pneumonia. Dudley 
Erwin, Liberal member for Ballarat, who has just become married to an 
American whom he met when he was abroad at the United Nations last year, 
had a severe attack of gland trouble and there were various reports that
this was mumps.   Members of Parliament on both sides of the House who 
had not previously had mumps became, to some degree, uneasy about this
suggestion.     This resulted in various proposals being put forward to 
the Speaker that would make sure that such members remained in quarantine.

               Be that as it may, on Tuesday night, the Government thought 
it had a majority and so Mr. Erwin was not in the Chamber and we lost a- 
snap vote on the adjournment.

               The next day, Dudley Erwin was a good deal better but he 
was rugged up with towels wrapped round his neck while he was sitting in
the Chamber.     Indirectly, because of him, the Parliament had an early
night.    The time came for the adjournment about 10.30 in the evening 
and Eddie Ward and one or two Labour members rose in their places which 
indicated that they wanted to .speak. There is generally an adjournment 
debate every Wednesday and Thursday after Government business is concluded 
and during these adjournment debates any member can rise and speak on any



                                                                  /2.

                  2


 subject that he wishes to. However, just as Eddie Ward was going to rise 
 in his place to beat the Government over the head in his usual fashion, 
 Dudley Erwin went over and sat alongside him on the Labour front bench. 
 Eddie Ward was so frightened of catching mumps - though Dudley Erwin did 
 not have them - he immediately went out of the Chamber and the adjournment 
 debate collapsed.

       In addition to this list, Hughie Leslie from the Country Party 
 in West Australia and John England from the Country Party in New South Wales 
 were also sick, and Athol Townley, who had an operation about a month ago, 
 is still not back on deck.

       This is a pretty hefty list of casualties, but the Government 
 would still not have lost the division that it did lose if another member, 
 Jeff Bate, had not been busy on the telephone when the bells rang. He was 
 down in his office on the telephone when the division bells went and Jeff, 
 in these circumstances, just didn't hear the bells and so this, perhaps, 
 more than anything else led to the Opposition winning a division last 
 Tuesday night.

       However, these misfortunes have not only hit the Liberal and 
 Country Parties. Arthur Calwell is still in hospital. Reg. Pollard has 
 not been present this week because his wife is ill. Hec. McIvor from 
 Gellibrand is seriously ill in Melbourne, I understand, with 'flu or 
 bronchitis, and Mr. Collard, Labour Member for Kalgoorlie, was away on 
 Tuesday until Wednesday afternoon.

       This list of casualties hitting several members of Parliament 
 in one week can give you an idea of the variety of causes that could lead 
 to a Government's downfall if the members happened to be away on a vital 
vote. The vote that the Government did lose was an unimportant one. The 
Government business for the day had been successfully concluded and the 
Minister in charge of the House moved that the House adjourn for the day - 
or night might be more appropriate since it was very late. Our Government 
Whips thought they had the numbers but, for the various reasons I have 
mentioned and, in particular, because of the absence of Jeff Bate, which 
was the one thing the Whips did not know about, we lost the division. This 
meant that the adjournment debate went on a bit longer than it otherwise 
might.

       When the Government lost this division, as you can imagine, 
there were some vigorous searches made in the corridors and offices of 
Parliament House to find where the missing member was. He was found and 
the Whips threatened to chain him into his seat in the Parliament for the 
future.

       On Wednesday afternoon, having been 12 hours in hospital, 
Billy Snedden came back to Canberra and again increased the Government's 
majority. Dudley Erwin's glandular fever seemed to get much better quite 
quickly and he was able to do without the towels and bandages around his 
neck, but Hughie Leslie kept to his bed and Jim Killen did not come to 
Canberra for the whole week. However, because of illness on the Labour 
side, even with these absentees the Government's majority was quite secure 
and sound. No more members forgot to hear the bells when they were on 
the telephone.

