<!--start metadata-->
Title: A great fear buried
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 28/02/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   6 4




        Every free country in the world has inherited a great fear 

from the prewar period. The depression and unemployment of the thirties 

left their mark upon men and women of every nation. Since this last war 

we have often been warned that a recession is almost inevitable bringing with 

it unemployment and hardship. People thinking along these lines cannot
                             war
understand why this has not happened. They may point to the Korean and 

say tat it was the orders for our armed services that saved the free 

world from depression in 1950.. They say that the depression will come now 

the war is over. This attitude is both dangerous and wrong. It shows a 

complete misunderstanding of the changes that have taken Iblace in the 

economics of government over the last twenty years.

        Before the last mxxx great war the economics of trade 

and of internal credit were governed by the automatic mechanism of the 

gold standard. You willt remember how our gold reserves rose or fell 

according to the balance of trade. Under favourable conditions gold would 

come into our ountry in payment for our ex prts and internal credit 

was expanded. On t e othef and if we could not sell our goods abroad 

gold would have. to be exported to pay for our necessary imports. This 

impliesan automatic tightening of our creditx which wouldbring deflation and 

umemploymentwith it.This system was thought tobe autamatic in operation 

and as. unchangeable as the natural laws of the universe. In the 19 th 

century it worked reasonably well but the violent disturbances that have 

occurred since the tar of I14 to 1918 have exposed the inadequacies and 

the cruelty of the gold standard. The United States was among the first 

countries to recognise this. She passed financial laws to counteract the 

effect of the system on her internal credit position. The result of these

-laws was to turn the gold standard into a dollar standard as early as 1925.

 They were at the same time a contributing cause in the great depression.

           By 1930 it was generally recognised that the gold standard

was a thing of the past but we had not yet learnt how to get on without it. Only

 in the middle thirties did Maynard Keynes, who gave his life for England and

 the world, formally set out the objections to the old system and shove how

we could do much better withthut it. He showed us how the gold standard

tied internal credit too closely to the balance of trade and how the level.

of employment varied with the volume of goods we sold abroad. When countries

tried to mitigate these illy effects by arbitrary measures things were only

made worse for people in other lands. 71e now know that through monetary

and fiscal weapons the economy can be kept on an even keel.In times of

inflation taxes are increased to reduce purchasing power while if there is

any sign of recession taxes can be cut to give further stimulus to trade.

Largely due to the efforts of Keynes the International Monetary Fund was

established at the Bretton Woods conferance of 1944. Its main purpose is to

tide countries over their balance of trade problems, to advise when a 
        w currency
revaluation of a RR Rtxxxmay be desirable or what internal monetary measures

may be suitable for a particular case. The Fund recognises the fact that the 

internal level of employment should not be dependant on the balance of trade. 

           We now have the weapons to cure inflation and depression 

before they become really harmfull( it is interesting toknow that in 1950 

our stirling balances fell more disasterously than they did in the depression 

of the thirties, that this fact was not born more heavily on Australians is 

due to our economic knowledge and the sound use made of it), Twenty years ago 

 we did not think there was anything we could do about inflation or depression, 

we thought the gold standard had to run its cruel course. We have broked away

from all this. We know that we can do a very great deal to cure economic ills 
and that,granted the ability td) work peacefully with our neighbours both at home 
and abraad, inflations and depressions- will never again be allowed to bring
real unhappiness to this ao or any other country


    dL:4,04iTz cxj-t 1-4 tA:, /4_




















                                       4

