<!--start metadata-->
Title: Northern Australia
Description: press statement
Date: 1/10/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


             PRESS STATEMENT

                                                            October lst,1961

                      In the last year or two a great deal more emphasis has been
             placed on the north of Australia.   We have heard people demanding 
             a blue print for the development of the north - for the establish- 
             ment of an Authority similar to the Snowy Mountains Authority.
                      The north presents Australia with unique problems which 
             it is often difficult to tackle in a spectacular fashion because 
             the pattern of development has not yet been decided. Let me compare 
             the Snowy Mountains Authority. When this Authority was established 
             we knew what was going to be done with the power that was going to 
             be produced. It was going to industries in New South Wales and 
             Victoria. We also knew what would be done with the water that is
             being conserved.   It goes to supplement and increase the Murray 
             and Murrumbidgee Irrigation schemes where crops can be and are grown 
             which have a ready commercial value.
                       Now, let us look to the north.  In the Kimberleys, there 
             are two or three places where large dams could be built that might
•            cost £20M. each.   In all, it may be possible to irrigate about 
             half a million acres, but at the present stage of development this 
             is as far as we can foresee. We do not know what we would do with 
             the area once it was irrigated. This is why the Kimberley Research 
             Station was established and why a small diversion dam is being 
             built on the Ord dam to irrigate about 15,000 acres. This will 
             enable large scale experiments to be conducted to test the economics 
             of agriculture in the Kimberley region. It is known we can grow 
             rice but, so far, an economic crop has not been produced. It is 
             known we can grow sugar but there is already a surplus of sugar 
             production, and very often growers in Queensland have to plough 
             back uncut sugarcane into the ground. Cotton can be grown, and 
             very well, but at the present time the cost of insecticides that 
•            must be put on to control disease makes the production quite
             uneconomic.   If a cheap insecticide could be found or if some 
             other method of control of the disease and viruses that attack 
             cotton could be discovered, then cotton could be a most profitable
             crop in the Kimberleys.  C.S.I.R.O. officers are working on this. 
             Safflower can be grown and there are real possibilities of safflower 
             being successfully used as a supplementary cattle feed.
                       Up to the present time a good deal of emphasis has been 
             placed on getting a cash crop for the potential farmers of the
             Kimberleys.   To some extent, I think this approach is wrong. 
             There is already a very large but inefficient cattle industry in
             the Kimberleys. The whole region will not be used to best advantage
             until this industry is put on an efficient basis. At the present 
             time, animals have to go a long way to market. Except in the 
             short wet season, it is not a good fattening country and bullocks
             are generally 4 to 7 years of age when they are sold. If the 
             lands to be irrigated in the Kimberleys were turned over to cattle 
             fattening the cattle breeders would only have to take their cattle

                             a short distance and would probably be able to get rid of them at 2 -
                             18 months to 2 years old and then the irrigated lands would turn off 
                             the bullocks at 2 1/2 years of age. This would make efficient use of 
                             the irrigated pastures and, at the same time, would offer a great 
                             stimulus to the cattle breeders of the Kimberleys to improve their 
                             properties - to put up fences; to increase the number of watering
                             points and to improve the breed.                                             At the present moment they often
                             can't afford to do these things because the final return from the
                             kind of cattle that they can turn off is just too low.                                                                       Under present 
                             circumstances, good quality beef cannot come out of the Kimberleys. 
                             However, the greatest catch in what I have put forward is the fact 
                             that any tropical grasses that would be suitable for irrigation have 
                             so far got viruses and disease under conditions in the Kimberleys. 
                           -The C.S.I.R.O. is working on this, but so far without success. 
                             A good irrigated tropical pasture is, I believe, essential to the 
                             proper development of this region, but so far there is none available. 
                             If such a grass or combination of grasses could be found I believe 
                             the Kimberleys would jump ahead and there would be an incredible 
•                            demand for the Government to go ahead with the large scale develop- 
                             ment of the area.
                                              I have spoken at some length on the Kimberleys because it 
                             highlights the difficulties and shows that you can't just go ahead
                             and plan vast public works without knowing the purpose for which
                             these works are being built.                                        In saying this, I want to emphasise 
                             that I have the greatest confidence in the Kimberley's development 
                             in the future, but at the moment there is still some essential 
                             information that we must have before we can give the "full ahead."
                                                There is one other aspect of development in the north. Up 
                             to the present only a few with the real pioneering spirit have been
                             prepared to make their lives there. The reasons are plain.                                                                                The
•                            life, especially for womenfolk, is often very hard. There are no 
                             facilities and no amenities such as we would know them in the
                             settled parts of Australia.                                       In addition, there is no social life - 
                             the neighbours may be 50 miles away. Many young people will be 
                             prepared to go up there and take part in this life for themselves, 
                             but they think twice if they believe their wives and their families
                             will spend their days under the same circumstances.                                                                   The position of 
                             having too few people with no social life and no amenities has got
                             to be broken.                      It is a vicious circle for the reason there are no 
                             people because there are no amenities, and there are no amenities 
                             because there are too few people. For this reason it is my belief 
                             that when the knowledge is finally available to make it possible 
                             to go full speed ahead Governments should concentrate on particular 
                             areas to start with rather than spread their resources across the
                             whole of North Australia.                                    If a concentrated attack is made on the 
                             problems of the Kimberleys, as soon as full knowledge is available 
                             then people could be persuaded to go knowing that others would also 
                             be going and thus a real community would be established. If only 
                             a little bit is done here and a bit there the possibility of success 
                             would be greatly reduced.

•
                                              3 -
                        The north of Australia is on the march but progress is not
              going to be spectacular for some time.    For this reason, some 
              Australians have gained the impression that relatively little is
              being done.   I think this is wrong. The basic ground work, the 
              research and the investigations are all under way. There is some 
              additional information required, however, especially in relation to 
              the Kimberleys, before a spectacular scheme of development could be 
              undertaken.









   •












   •

