<!--start metadata-->
Title: Industrial situation, Warrnambool Institute of Advanced Education and Portland Technical School
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 30/04/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       BROADCAST                               3HA Sunday, 30 April, 1972. 
                                               3YB Thursday, 4 May, 1972. 
                                               3LK, Tuesday, 2 May, 1972.

            Last week my colleague, the Minister for Labour and National 
       Service, introduced into Federal Parliament the most significant 
       amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act for 25 years.
            The need for revisions to our industrial legislation must be
      apparent to you all.  Our system of conciliation and arbitration has
      been undergoing severe strain against a background of increasing 
       industrial unrest and serious wage—induced inflation.
            The industrial situation in Australia in recent times has
      not been an encouraging one. There are far too many strikes and 
      far too many man days lost as a result of them. Working days lost 
      in 1971 increased by 28 per cent over the loss for 1970, and wages 
      lost increased by 46.5 per cent.
            Already, this year there have been several serious disputes
      such as the one inflicted on the State Electricity Commission of
•     Victoria.  It's more than a matter of man hours lost, of course.
•     Strikes and other forms of industrial action cause hardship to workers
      not directly involved. In the case of the S.E.C. strike, while 
      only 11,000 S.E.C. workers were actually involved in industrial 
      action, the strike resulted in up to some 200,000 workers in Victoria
      and thousands more in other States being stood down for varying 
      periods of time. And there were many more who, although not stood 
      down, were not productively employed for long periods as a result 
      of power restrictions and other adverse affects of the strike.
            At the same time, the economy has been bedevilled by inflation 
      caused largely by excessive wage demands, by increasingly militant
      unions and by employers' inability or reluctance to resist union
      tactics and claims.

                                    2.

            All these factors are part of the background_ to the legislation 
      outlined by the Minister for Labour and National Service last week. 
      I shall now outline some of the main provisions of the Government's 
      bill.
            The Conciliation and Arbitration functions of the Conciliation 
      and Arbitration Commission are to be separated, and "task forces"
      or panels of the Commission are to be established. An industry 
      or group of industries will be assigned to a panel with the object 
      of bringing about more speedy attention to disputes arising in the
•     task force's particular area.
            The bill strengthens the sanctions provisions of the Act, and
      reviews penalites.  This has to be seen in the context of the 
      Government's consistent policy that sanctions are a last resort and 
      that every reasonable endeavour should be made to settle disputes by 
      the traditional methods of conciliation and/or arbitration.
            The secret ballot provisions of the Act will be extended to 
      enable the Commission toorder a ballot where a ban or strike is 
      threatened or exists.
•           Decisions of the Commission can, of course, have major
      implications for the national economy. The bill will ensure that the 
      Commission should have regard in particular to the state of the economy 
      and_ the likely effects on that economy of any award that it might
      make.
            The bill also contains stricter provisions to ensure a more 
      effective democratic control of unions and other registered organisations. 
      It also tightens the provisions under which union amalgamations can
      proceed.  Under the bill, for an amalgamation to succeed, it will 
      require a vote by at least half of the eligible membership of each
      organisation, and a vote in favour by more than half of those voting
      formally in each organisation.  In other words, at least 25 per cent

  ~
                                   3.

     of each union's membership will have to vote in favour of the 
     amalgamation before it is allowed to proceed.
           Australia's economic progress must not be impeded by 
     irresponsible industrial upheavals, but at the same time, the rank 
     and file unionist must not be prevented from pursuing the legitimate 
     aims and objectives of improving, within the nation's capacity, his
     wages and conditions of work.  The Government's new legislation is 
     framed with that in mind.
•

           There has been good news for Warrnambool Instititute of
     Advanced Education and Portland Technical School in the last few days.
           Under a bill I introduced in Parliament last week, the 
     Warrnambool Institute will be allocated $58,000 towards the erection 
     of a student residence designed to accommodate 28 students. With the 
     matching grant from the Victorian Government, this will provide
•    $116,000 for the project which will be able to proceed immediately.
•    It is hoped to have the building ready for occupancy by the beginning 
     of the 1973 academic year.
           This will bring the total anticipated capital allocation from the
     Commonwealth for the Warrnambool Institute to $189,460,which with 
     Victoria's matching grant comes to $378,920.
           The bill I introduced also provided a further $787,000 towards 
     the running costs of Colleges of Advanced Education such as 
     Warrnambool's Institute. When matched by the States, this will amount 
     to $2,242,000.

                                  4.


           I am also pleased to be able to tell you that the building 
      programme at the Portland Technical School has been advanced by more 
      than 12 months as a result of the special Commonwealth grant to the 
      States for Government school building.
           Of the $20 million grant, Victoria was allocated $5.1 million, 
      and the Victorian Minister for Education, Mr. Thompson,has advised me 
      that the building of stage two at the Portland Technical School 
      has been advanced.
           Costing about $400,000, stage two will comprise an administration 
 •    block, a mathematics and science block and a gymnasium, an6 shoulc_ be 
      ready for occupancy next school year.
           It is most gratifying to see examples such as these of 
      Commonwealth—State co—operation in the very necessary field of 
      providing educational facilities.





•

•


      For further information: Collin Myers
                               Canberra Telephone 73 3261

