<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Games
Description: Electorate talks
Date: 10/10/1982
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                    EMBARGO: 5.00pm





       PRIME MINISTER


FOR MEDIA         SUNDAY, 10 OCTOBER 1982


            ELECTORATE TALK


Now that. the Commonwealth Games has finished, I want to thank 
a great many people for what they have done for Australia in 
making the last 10 days so wonderfully successful. The Games 
brought out the best qualities in Australians and those 
qualities came through clearly in the efforts and achievements 
of the thousands of competitors and organisers. They worked 
together - many of them literally for years - to bring off 
a magnificent sporting occasion. And in doing so, they brought 
together the entire Australian nation.

The opening ceremony will stay in the minds of Australians 
for a very long time. There was a friendly and light-hearted 
atmosphere as the thousands of school children poured on to the 
QEII sports ground to create that memorable display of the Flag 
and the map of Australia which filled every Australian who saw 
it with a feeling of pride. in our country that is difficult to 
put into words. The children and the arrangers of the display 
deserve great credit. So, too, do the dancers from the. 
cross-section of national backgrounds who performed at the 
opening and who brought home to us the truly multi-cultural 
nature of Australian society today.

So many people contributed to the success of the Games. The 
organisers and officials not only in Brisbane but throughout 
Australia and the whole Commonwealth. The volunteers who gave 
their time and effort willingly for their country, there 
were thousands of them. The members of the Australian armed 
forces, the ABC, for their exceptional TV coverage in Australia 
and around the world. The people of Brisbane for being such good 
hosts in the dynamic and colourful city of which they can be 
very proud. And, of course, the competitors, our outstanding 
Australian team and their dedicated, long suffering coaches, 
families and other supporters.

I look back to 1976 when I visited the Australian team at the 
Olympic Games in Montreal where we had not won a single gold 
medal. The team were depressed; Australians in general were 
disappointed. Intensive training and coaching and a scientific 
approach to sport in other countries meant that our athletes 
were being left behind. The Government had to decide whether 
we would let the world pass us by or whether we would give our 
athletes the full-blooded support they needed to win world 
victories.

              -2-


We established the Australian Institute of Sport, it has cost 
$34 million to build and equip so far, and it has contributed 
significantly to Australia's 107 medals this year. Champions 
like triple gold medal winner Lisa Curry and marathon-winner 
Robert de Castella came from the Institute. The Government 
gave the Commonwealth Games Association $455,000 to help 
prepare athletes and to provide them with the international 
competition that is a vital part of their preparation.
Another. $200,000 went towards the staging of the S.G.I.O. 
Games in Brisbane last year as a warm-up for the Commonwealth. 
Games itself.

Now there are new targets in our sights. In 1984, the first 
Biennial Australia Games is planned for Sydney.. Then, later 
that year, comes the Los Angeles Olympics. The Government 
is providing $1.5 million to the Australian Olympic
Federation for the preparation of our athletes.

At the same time this is on top of the continued funding of 
dozens of national sporting organisations through the Sports 
Development Program and, of course, the Australian Institute 
of Sport will grow and develop. Australia's athletes deserve 
the:support of this nation. In the last 10 days they provided 
the hard evidence of a dramatic revival of Australia's sporting. 
ability. They also set a wonderful example, displaying good 
sportsmanship whether they won or lost, and I believe, representing 
the true co-operative spirit of the Commonwealth. Our representatives 
took the nation with them in the intense national pride and 
purpose they exhibited. For that we thank them greatly.

