<!--start metadata-->
Title: Radio talk, election
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: c1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                   -1-

           •eve.-p         • Oovernn,ent one to the polls 7:1711.      record ps
thaL    thOs      Liberal-Gourtr •arty yovernrrent of ()ors.   •ou a1,1 reoembor the 
1e!;-('J of inrostri.1 unrest, c Co—unirm in the hnions, of shortpeer of every 
essentipl o• teritl theo had tc he overcome. 'rhe ineuctrinl nrohlem ws, the first 
one th t hod to be tackled, for this was holeine un nroeuction in —er7 sphere 
 minc it eytramely difficult for farmers to imProve their -ronertior -re for
faetories to work efficiently.
            any people hpve not been able to tnherstare hoo it ir       the Liberal-
COUT't_-1'     overnment hr suceeeded so well hen the Labour fhrtv, hecro 1949
fhiled so i-oeteh y.    The answer is twofole: the secret Wirt mnee it ocesible
for the first ti,me for evo-v decent unionirt to h,h-e •is s-v i- hie urion affairs,
and 1 or one will reve.. he a-le to uneerst.-re ho.» 11 ih     -h-        Phrty
stenef?stly or osed the sec-st hpllot prr thus r orlo accePtee hot encrylr?red
 intimidation hnd craft in the uniens.
             ilat this was not the only thinr.  r, Harold           i-irler "or 
Lpoour, made it his business to consult 7.11.e unions rhen art -7e-rrpe were contem- 
 plated thnt wohld effect union members, snd so, when finpl decisions were msde,
 they embodied the opinions of everyone concerned.
             These two thinos beve riven us e lerpe measure               reece - 
 11 ihrAstriol peace that has beon the foundption 'iron which we can r.o aheed t.rld •
 develop our courorv.
             To-day, production is hioher in. every 'ield then it h?r bhan hefere.
   e.n .et the .tertlo we need to .170170 our oro-erties, pnd fsctoris pre Tint
 held un by shortapes of power or r-- frpteripls.
             But above all, we ha.-e     e7rdooent pne a tioher level of nronseritv
 than    ever had before.    !e Ion- 1?St in emilton Enoloymert L'fice,I fne
 thet           n t been one n receivirr unemolovnent benefits rIce lart November, 
 e fie tribute to the .eda'n1 Governmert, which alone c?n create the co-ditions 
 under which the full emolovment of every nen end wown is hossible. These nolicies 
 of full onnlayment end. industrial peace he 'rode it nosrible net only to consieer-
 ably increase socihl servjces, b t lso to eecrepse taxation.     The results ere all
 Lhe eor     mnh 'hen        thin' that the Governnent had rot onlv to overcome
 lecacie7 of 'o=or unrest,' but also to arrest w.'.?t cohle have turnoe into  severe
 economic crisis, for in 1.2," our e7Port income fell hs erestically en it had in 
             ohen unemploynent..teeche 3(.6 of trFde unionists. ',11t in

                                   -p_

unemfloyment was checeedet on e P of unionist-, and we now have higher emnloyment
than we ever had before.
       In edrition to Vis, there was th urth r obstacle of the Xoreen Wer
which hed to be Thu-ht and wee.
       te rust or env ewait the Coverneent`s -Ilene for the future, for it
record in the eest is a guarantee that their promises and plans for the future
will be fulfilled.
       es a candidate in this election, 1 have the sunport of a strong, united 
Liberal-Country Party, of a Farty which has been extreerdinfrilv necceeseul in its
recent teem of office.   We know the echieveeents of the east four veers, end 
are keenly eufitinr ror the future development of' this nation. But quite erert 
from this record and erorise forth(' future, any ceedidetee cominp befere the 
people must ha e an unehekeeble helief in the imnortenc- of 'very ran. women and 
child, eor the ineividual hereiness of every citizen '-'us be the first thoupht of
mer. seeking to serve the natioe,eustraliv is rreet only while our een end
women are fr-.o fror fear and eant, end only while our children can ri y without 
the shador of ueheppiness passing across their faces.
        At the Liberal Convention, nt which I was chosen cendidete, I nromisod 
thet free; the moment the C nvention deers closed, I would go out end nend my 
whele ti»e 'eetinr' the people of Wannon end learning the greet end diverse needs
of this area.  In recent months I have travelled fifteen thousend milee, end 
vieited every cerner of the electoree , so thet if 1 em chosen an renresentative 
of the people, 1 will have hr contact with all sections of the community, end 
believe this is the only ray in which e Representative can do 8 just and fair job 
for every arson in his electorate.
         y ambitioe is to cherish and meintain the i •ividuel interests and 
happiness of every eerson, for this ie surely the most ineortent task th-t lies 
before us to-dey. If I en elected, 1 shell vieit eve ee cerner of eianon as often 
as other entice reenit, so that each person e n have a ehence to eeet 7r, and discuss 
any indivielel rrobleme.
         e,y. one hope is that I tv,r be riven the opnortunity to airy my eert In the 
greet work teet lies before this (eovernment, end to shoe you thet these beliefs 
end ideas lie very neer to my heert.

