<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: press statement
Date: 16/08/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        PRESS STATEment 

        MALCOLM FRASER:

                                                              August 16th,1964


                     The first week of the Spring session did not contain many 
        surprises. There were two items of major business, the first of these was 
        the introduction of the Budget and the second was the debate on foreign 
        affairs and., in particular, on the situation in South Vietnam.

                     The difficulties confronting the Treasurer have been quite 
        well recognised. The Commonwealth was faced with mounting demands for 
        expenditure in many fields and at the same time it had to introduce a 
        Budget that would not add to the inflationary situation in Australia. 
        It is an unfortunate fact that in an expanding economy where a population is 
        growing quite rapidly each year, governmental expenditure must also rise. 
        The explanation for this is simple, if there are more people you need more 
        schools, better roads, more hospitals. There are more people reaching 
        pensionable age and so without any additional benefits a mere maintenance 
        of existing standards would require greater expenditure. When, at the 
        same time, you are trying to improve standards throughout the community and 
        supply better services for our people, it is clear that increased expenditure
•       cannot be avoided.

                     To this particular situation was added a large increase in the
        defence vote.    We should by now all recognise that this is absolutely 
        necessary. The situation in our north is so unsettled, the future so 
        uncertain that Australia must continue to expand her defence forces. I 
        doubt if anyone would argue that other particular items of expenditure 
        which have been increased are not necessary. The most important increases 
        are in the fields of defence and in payments to the States. The first will 
        absorb an additional £36M, the second £52M.

                     Payments for national welfare have increased by £35M, for
        capital works and services about £24M. Total increases in Commonwealth 
        expenditure in this year will be £224M.

                     It is recognised that Commonwealth receipts will rise because 
        the economy is buoyant, there will be more people in employment with an 
        expanding population and therefore Commonwealth revenues must increase. 
        Without any additional taxes it is expected that Commonwealth Revenues would
        increase by £180M.

                     There is clearly a gap between the additional revenue and 
        additional expenditure. If we had been in a condition of some unemployment, 
        of resources that were not fully used, this gap would not have mattered it 
        could have been financed by means of a deficit budget but under present 
        circumstances, when employment is running high, where some industries are 
        already beginning to bid between themselves for the available supply of labour, 
        such means of finance would be highly inflationary. Thus the Commonwealth 
        accepted the always unpleasant task of increasing some taxes. The most 
        notable ones are the abolition of the 5% personal rebate and the increase of 
        61. in the £ of Company Tax.

                     The television licences fees have been increased by £l. This
        increase has a curious history. For some time the Government has been 
        collecting excise duties on cathode ray tubes which are parts of television
        sets.   It is now found that there are difficulties in the continued collection 
        of this duty and the Government is going to maintain the revenue lost from 
        this source by an increase of £1. in licence fees. Because duty will no 
        longer be collected on cathode ray tubes, the price of television sets should 
        be reduced by this amount.

                     The increase in certain telephone charges will probably be one of 
        the most unpopular in the Budget. The Treasurer explained that this service

                                                                            /2

                             - 2 -


        has been running at a loss and it was one of the fields in which it was 
        felt the users should pay the greater proportion and the taxpayers 
        slightly less.

                 The arguments about telephone charges and postal charges 
        that have some times arisen about the P.M.G.'s Department are at least 
        partly academic. No one argues that the E.M.G. should not expand and 
        continue to provide better services as it does, but people do some times 
        argue that the charges should be less than they are. Since very very 
        large sums of money are already provided each year from general tax- 
        payers funds to finance additional P.M.G. works and services, it is 
        clear that if charges are reduced and if the rate of P.M.G. development 
        is to be maintained then the taxpayer would have to more directly provide 
        for the Department.

                 On the other hand if charges are increased the taxpayer 
        provides less from general revenue. Since telephone users and the 
•       subscribers to the taxation reveues of the Commonwealth are very largely 
        comprised of the same people it is,in my view, somewhat an academic 
        argument as to where the money comes from.

                 It is worth noting that the main increases in expenditure 
        in this particular Budget lie in the field of defence, payments to the 
        States and national welfare, i.e. social services and repatriation 
        benefits. The additional taxes that the Commonwealth has felt necessary 
        to impose because of these increased demands on revenue will produce a 
        small surplus of about £1SM in Commonwealth accounts. In a year in 
        which there are incipient signs of inflation anything less would be 
        unrealistic.



                              -oOo

