<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool sales, education
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 17/10/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


        BROADCAST TALK 3HA Sunday Oct. 17 171
                       3YB Thursday, Uct. 21 '71

        This is Malcolm Fraser in Canberra.

        With the first series of wool sales in Portland held last 
        week our attention is once again firmly fixed on the prices 
        being received.

        This is a time of great worry for many of us. There are 
        few encouraging signs in the market. I notice that some 
        prices topped 100 cents per kilo -- others however were 
        down to 46 cents. We can all clearly remember when these 
        prices were being received per pound.
~•      However we do have the backstop of the Wool Deficiency 
        Payments Bill which has now gone through the second reading 
        in Parliament.

        Although I dealt with this scheme several weeks ago in 
        detdl I know many of you may still be not clear on the 
        way the deficiency payments will be made. So I will deal 
        with this important subject again.

        I would also like ti give a summary of the main provisions 
        outlined in the comprehensive statement on the Commonwealth 
        Education Program for this year which I delivered to Parliament.
 •
        In essence the Wool Deficiency Payments Bill, as you all 
        know by now, provides a minimum average price for the
        Australian wool clip of 36 cents per lb. The only exception 
        is the estimated 10 per cent of very low grade wools. The 
        prices received for these are included in reaching the average, 
        but they are not elegible for subsidy payment.

        In practice, the Australian Wool Commission will average 
        out prices at the end of each week of wool aucti:ns. The 
        difference in the actual proceeds received and whathey 
        would have been had an average price of 36 cents per lb. 
        been paid will be calculated as a percentage.

                                               Broadcast ... 2

              Every grower who sold wool at that week's auction will 
              then be eligible for an increase in the price he receives 
              by that percentage. In other words if th4otal wool 
              receipts are 20 per cent lower than the set figure, all 
              prices will be increased by 20 per cent.

              This means that the growers of finer wools will get a 
              higher cash return than growers of coarser wool — who do 
              however , have the benefit of the higher carcass price.

              The Deficiency payment scheme covers wool sold between 
              the second of July this year and the 30th of June 1972.

•             Brokers will forward to theiAustralian Woll Commission a list 
              of their clients who sold wool at auction during each 
              particular week, showing the amount of deficiency money
              to be paid. The Commission, acting as an agent for the 
              Commonwealth Government, will then make the payment to 
              the broker for forwarding to each particular grower.

              It is important to remember that poor grade woo.
              3tiwa                  , do not attract subsidy.
              But because their prices are included when working out
              the average price — the 90 per cent of the clip 
              which is eligible for subsidy in fact has a basic price 
 •            of nearly 39 cents per lb.
              The success of this method of payment obviously depends 
              on the active cooperation of everyone concerned, — brokers, 
              registered classing houses , wool merchants, and agents 
              who export wool or sell wool by tender on behalf of
              producers. These must all be registered, which isJ ne 
              on application, with the Department of rrimary Industry.

              It is our earnest hope that by the combined efforts of 
              this Deficiency Payments Scheme, and the operation of the
              Australian Wool Commission in the auction room,
                  returns to woolgrowers will be lifted by more than
              one hundred million dollars over last year's total receipts.

                                               Broadcast ... 3


                The Education of our children is always of great
                importance.  That this is well recognised by the Commonwealth 
                Government is shown, I believe , by the fact that this year 
                a total of 345 million dollars will be spent directly 
                bn education throughout Australia.

                This is in addition to the money spent by the States 
                themselves ... an amount estimated this year to exceed 
                1-thousand 2-hundred and 50 dollars.
                                         A
                Both these amounts, the Commonwealth's and the State's , 
                are considerably more than the expenditure last year. The 
                largest increases in single items will be in payments to 
•               the States for Universities, Colleges of Advanced Education, 
                and Teachers Colleges.

                These figures are contained in the comprehensive Ministerial 
                Statement on our Education Program for 1971-72 which I 
                delivered to the house of Representatives several days ago.

                The area of Commonwealth Scholarships to assist students 
                has received considerable attention. By the end of next 
                year the number of students holding these scholarships will
                have grown to 71-thousand. The number of Scholarships 
                available for Advanced Education rises from Ì 2-thousand- 
 •              5-hundred , to 4-thousand.

                The role of independent schools in our educational system 
                will continue to be encouraged and supported. Grants to 
                these non-Government schools will total 31 million dollars
                this year.  TheGovernment believes that parents must have 
                the right to choose whether to send their children to 
                Government or Non-Government schools.

                The quality of education cannot of course be mreasured 
                merely in terms of money spent. We recognise that even 
                more important than equipping students to meet future 
                technological change is the need for a community comprising 
                men and women with high human values. We must constantly
                re-define our education goals to ensure that they are 
                effectively oriented towards these objectives.

