<!--start metadata-->
Title: Television
Description: press statement
Date: 25/03/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT

 MA.LCOLM FRASER:

                                                   March 25th,1962


                             TELEVISION


              Two or three things happened last week which are of interest
 to Western Victoria.   In a question to the Postmaster-General, I pointed 
 out that he would have a very difficult time justifying in country areas 
 the establishment of an additional television station in five capital cities 
 while some country areas still do not receive any television service, and 
 I asked the Postmaster-General what could be done to speed up the develop- 
 ment of television in rural areas where the population justified it.

              The Postmaster-General pointed out that the decision to call 
 tenders for additional licences for the capital cities would in no way 
 delay the programs which are at present under way to establish television
 in country areas.   There are still some country areas where the Australian 
 Broadcasting Control Board has to hear evidence before it decides who will 
 be getting a licence. It will be hearing the evidence for the country 
 stations before it hears evidence for the additional capital city stations.

              The Postmaster-General also gave an assurance that the 
 resources required to establish the additional stations in the capital 
 cities would not be allowed to detract from the resources necessary to
 establish stations in country areas, All this is all right as far as it 
goes, but Western Victoria has a particular worry, Mt.Buangor will be 
operating shortly, and there will be areas in Western Victoria beyond the
reach of a good signal from that station.  We won't know the extent of 
these areas until that station starts to operate, Then, on the other hand, 
it has been decided to call for a licence for Mt. Gambier and this is going 
to be done this year. However, this may mean that the Mt.Gambier station 
will not be operating until 1964.

             There is an area lying between the Mt.Buangor station and the 
Mt.Gambier station which may not get good reception from either of these 
centres, I hope to be able to persuade the Postmaster-General that as 
soon as Mt.Buangor is operating, within the next few weeks, he should have 
his officers examine the strength of the signal to the West to see where 
the reception falls off and then, if there is a reasonable possibility that 
the areas concerned will not get a good reception from Mt.Gambier a decision 
should be made to call for an additional licence. If Western Victoria has 
to wait for Mt.Gambier to operate before making the final decision it will 
delay matters a very long while. Unfortunately, the Postmaster-General is 
in a reasonably strong position in arguing against this, if he wishes to do 
so because, as yet, there is no sign of a television station anywhere in his 
own electorate and none of his own electors can receive television.

                     GOVERNMENT MEMBERS' COMMITTEES

             In the first weeks of this Parliament Government Members' 
Committees have been re-formed and some of them are already active. The 
Food and Agriculture Committee is making a close examination of the problems 
of the dairy industry and has already begun to have leaders of the dairy 
industry organizations explain their point of view to the Committee members
at Canberra.   It is most important that this be done at this particular 
time because the new stabilization plan for the Dairy Industry must be 
introduced in this Autumn session of Parliament to replace the plan that 
expires on the 30th June this year.




                                                           %2 .

                                 -2



               The Government Members' Wool Committee (of which I am still 
  Secretary) has also been re-formed. This Committee has already written 
  to all wool industry organizations indicating that the Committee will hold 
  itself ready to discuss the Wool Report with the organizations on a Federal 
  level as soon as the organizations have made up their own minds. This, 
  of course, will take some time because the organizations must discuss this 
 Report on a State level and their their various State viewpoints will be
 brought together at the Federal level.   This Report is clearly going to 
 be most controversial, but there are aspects of it which please me. For 
 example, there was an irresponsible report carried in some newspapers that 
 the Report had recommended against Portland and Brisbane as woolselling
 centres.     This was very far from the truth.  The Report recommended 
 against the indiscriminate expansion of woolselling centres,and with this 
 we would all agree, but the Report recognised that occasions may arise 
 under which new centres should be established, and it suggested that a 
 Sub-Committee operating under the Wool Commission should examine this
 matter from time to time.    The Wool Inquiry Committee mentioned the 
 fact that it had received some evidence regarding Portland and Brisbane 
 but indicated that it thought a decision on these matters should not be 
 made by the Inquiry but should really be made by the Commission which it 
 hoped to establish. It is worth noting that if the Wool Commission is 
 established a whole host of matters which are now decided by brokers and
 buyers will be decided by Committees on which the wool industry has a 
 majority and over which the wool industry ultimately would have full and
 complete control.     Having regard to the attitude of the brokers and 
 buyers to Portland, if this were accepted it would be a very marked improve-
 ment.    It would place the power and responsibility for wool industry 
 affairs where it properly belongs - in the hands of the industry and not 
 in the hands of brokers and buyers,


                             REDISTRIBUTION

              Early in this Parliament, the Minister for the Interior,
 Mr. Freeth, indicated that there would be a re-distribution of Commonwealth
 seats as a result of the census that was held last year. This, of course, 
 was expected because some electorates in the centre of the capital cities 
 have fallen in number down to about 30,000 and one to about 28,000. On the 
 other hand, there are two or three electorates of over 80,000 and one of 
 ovet 90,000. This quite clearly shows a very marked unbalance and it has 
 been brought about as a result of rapid development in the extra metropolitan 
 area and also by housing improvement programs in the cities because in those 
 electorates where the numbers have fallen it is generally as a result of slum 
 clearance programs or of other measures which have been begun to alleviate
 the housing shortage.  For example, for a while it was common to find many 
 migrant families in one home. Now this is not so common, and thus the 
 numbers in these areas have fallen.


              As a result of re-distribution, Victoria will get one extra
 seat because of its increased population, while New South Wales, 
 Queensland and Western Australia will each lose a seat. Now, you might 
 think it strange that, with an expanding population, the number of
 politicians would increase. The answer to this is highly technical and 
 is bound up with the formula which is laid down to govern the distribution
 of seats between the States and within one State. If any-one is particularly
 interested and would like to examine the formula, if they get in touch with me 
 I will tell them about it.


              So far as Wannon is concerned, there may not be a great change 
but, of course, it is too early to tell. However, the quota for Victoria 
will be 48,000 and at the last election there were nearly 45,000 on the roll
so Wannon would not have to be changed. It would be within the permissible 
limits.


              In the coming months we can expect to see Electoral Commissioners 
.IPpointed for each State, and plans for re-distribution will be drawn up. 
It is worth noting that the formulae and procedures laid down for a Common- 
wealth re-distribution are amongst the fairest that can be devised, and I 
am glad that Mr. Calwell has been on record as having confirmed this.

