<!--start metadata-->
Title: Forrest Place demonstration, industrial relations
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 31/03/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA                PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
       HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES               CANBERRA. ACT 2600 
                                              TEL 721211


FOR INFORMATION                     EMBARGO: Sunday, 

                                    31 March, 1974.


       ELECTORAL STATEMENT BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P., 

       MEMBER FOR WANNON - SUNDAY, 31 MARCH, 1974. 



      During this last week the Prime Minister was involved 

in a nasty demonstration while speaking at Forrest Place
in Perth.   Traditionally Forrest Place has been used by 

politicians of all parties as a great open-air forum for

political discussions and debate.  I hope that tradition 
remains.



      The demonstration against the Prime Minister was certainly

one that can give no Australian any cause for pride. It

ought not to have occurred.  Initially farmers were blamed for
the demonstration.  Farm organisations, I am quite sure, had 
no part in it and both the Leader of the Opposition, Mr.

Snedden and the Leader of the Country Party, Mr. Anthony, 

dis-associated themselves from the demonstration and deplored 

the fact that it had occurred.


      But I want to go further behind the scenes and ask 

         why did this demonstration occur in this particular
way.   Even if we assume that it was largely farmers involved

in that demonstration, and I do not concede tha;, it is not 
enough to assume that the people became so annoyed as a

result of the very anti-rural and hostile policies of the
present Government.  Certainly Mr. Whitlam has been
provocative.  He has told farmers that they have never had it 

so good, when many of them have been destroyed by floods and 
many others are still in debt as a result of ten years of 
low world prices and some years of very severe drought in 

Australia.



      So what Mr. Whitlam said was tackless and incorrect. 
But provocation is still not sufficient to cause people to 

prevent free speech and to prevent political arguments being 

put.


      I believe that what happened in Forrest Place can be 

related to events in other places and I also believe that the 

leaders of the present Government have a very significant 

responsibility for those events.

                         2.


      In the last years in Opposition members of the Australian 
 Labor Party were quite often taking to the streets organising 
 mass meetings of thousands of people to demonstrate a point and
 to demonstrate power. "Democracy has had its day", was one 
 famous phrase used by a person whom we would all know well.

      People were led to believe that demonstrations of 
 strength would change the course of government irrespective 
 of what the elected majority had determined, and thus it came 
 into vogue that a noisy and radical and disruptive minority
could compel the majority to adopt its views. I believe that 
 that is the philosophy that the Labor Party in the last few
years created.   Now Mr. Whitlam is reaping the benefit of 
what he and his own party founded.

      We have seen the same approach in matters that affect
the aboriginal people.  Coming through all of this is a very 
clear lesson that if our system of government is to work 
effectively it can only do so if the great majority of people 
are prepared to accept the decisions of government.

      We have an elected system and a democratic means of
changing government.  There used to be the view that if people 
not in government wanted to have their policie8 prevail they 
would work to have people change their votes, and that was 
the best and most appropriate means of getting policies
adopted.   However, once a person starts to advocate the 
view that minorities, by the selective use of disruptive 
tactics or by force, can compel the institutions and organisms 
of government to change their minds or give a decision they 
would not otherwise have given, then that society is
threatened with a serious breakdown in the fabric and
structure of democracy.

      We saw the demonstration before the Arbitration 
Commission which caused Mr. Justice Moore to postpone for 
a short while the hearing in the National Wage Case. We 
saw how Mr. Halfpenny gave praise to those demonstrators 
and indicated that next time the placards and the disruptions 
would be bigger and better.

      We have seen how the Arbitration Commission now will 
continue a hearing even though a union may be on strike. 
If my memory is correct, some years ago a hearing would be 
suspended while a union was on strike.

      Through all of this comes the view that violence and 
disruption are more common than they once were, and to a much 
too large a number of people are the accepted means of gaining
an objective.  Australians need to make it very plain that

                          3.

no matter what the circumstances, no matter what the cause, 
violence is not an acceptable means of changing policies and
must be rigorously rejected.  That means that minorities 
must accept the decision of majorities.

      It means that when a government has been duly elected
citizens will consent to the decisions of government. If they 
do not like the decisions they have their own recourse at 
subsequent elections and through advocacy and persuasion, but
not through violence.  The rash of strikes that has beset 
Australia since the present Government took office finds its
base in part at least, in the same cause. Radical union 
leaders have spread and promoted the philosophy that industrial 
disruption will gain greater rewards than from voluntary
negotiation or arbitration.  Indeed, I would believe that 
there are some radical union leaders who are not content until 
their has been disruption preceding an agreement or an award 
from the Arbitration Commission, and that they would believe 
they had not put adequate pressure on employers unless that 
happens.

      What they do not realise, of course, is that they are 
putting pressure on the whole community and damaging the whole 
community adding to the cost of inflation and perhaps hurting
their own members most of all.   The radical union organiser 
or secretary does not forego his salary when his union members 
go out on strike as a result, very often, of his decisions 
and recommendations.

      Coming through all of this is a need to get back to the 
view that our system depends upon the consent of the
governed.   For that consent to be full and broad across the
whole of society government at all times.needs to be sensitive and
tolerant of the views of minorities, and I would believe that
by and large Australian Governments have shown that tolerance
of minorities.

      The radical violent fringe of the left and of the right
has no place in our society.  The great majority of Australians 
need to make that very plain at each and every opportunity.

