<!--start metadata-->
Title: Victorian election, Land Conservation Council
Description: Broadcast
Date: 6/05/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


RADIO BROADCAST
SUNDAY, 6th MAY	
3 ;ÌA
WEDNESDAY, 9th MAY	
3L;'
THURSDAY, 10th MAY	
3:'B
On 19th May, Victoria will be going to the elections. It is  
the first time eighteen year olds will have voted in this  
State. I have already said that I welcome this move -
o  
in fact I wish we had introduced votes for eighteen year
olds before the last election. I take this view because  
I think more people in this age group now show a concern  
for many matters, which has earned them the vote. They  
show a concern for the under-privileged, they show a concern  
for the general nature and direction of Australian society.  
In addition, there are many who take a keen interest in  
international affairs and feel strongly about matters they  
believe to be right.
I very strongly support Dick Hamer in this election. and  
all the people who are standing as candidates for the
Liberal Party. You will know who they are -- Bruce Chamberlain  
standing for Dundas for the first time: Don McKellar is  
standing again for Portland: Ian Smith, a young and via7,orous  
Minister in the present Government in Victoria, stands for  
Warrnambool once again: and Dighy Crozier is standing for  
the Western Province for the second time. In or our of  
Parliament, these four have shown a concern and dedication  
in Victorian political affairs.
They are our representatives for this election. All men.
have campaigned vigorously and I hope the result will show
with effect on the 19th of May. There are a number of
reasons why I hope the vote for them will be strong. The
Liberal Party has governed Victoria for a number of years
and has given the State a sense of direction and a significant
development and growth in resources. Dick Hamer, as Premier,
has added to the achievements of Sir Henry Bolts. He's
entering into new fields. He places a great importance
on the total environment in which we live, and the
Government is well aware that continued development of
material resources is necessary if we are going to have
the ability to meet the aspirations of Australians in
matters of welfare, assistance to the disadvantaged, and
in the conquering of pollution in all its forms.
I will be attending meetings with these candidates during
next week and lending what support I can. I had hoped
to be able to spend the full week campaigning, but the
Federal Parliament is sitting and there is a real
possibility that the Abortion Bill will be coming up
for debate and voting, and I must be there for that to
cast my own vote against the Bill introduced by .Labor Members.
I would like to say something about the final recommendations
0.4/2


                   - 2 -




of the Land Conservation Council in Victoria, concerning 
its study of the south-western area of this State. I 
know there are people who can argue on both sides of 
this question, but I believe the report is a good one and 
I strongly support its recommendations for a major
national park in the Lower Glenelg.

This national park will be 64,000 acres. Its purpose is 
to protect and conserve the national fauna and flora for 
the enjoyment and inspiration of visitors and for scientific 
study, to protect and conserve the gorge of the Glenelg 
River, to provide opportunities for recreation and 
educational experience related to enjoying and under- 
standing nature. The park includes the gorge of the Lower 
Glenelg River, the Princess Margaret Rose Caves, the 
Bulleen, the Kentbruk Heath and Red Gum Swamp. The Council 
also recommends that the Glenelg River be available for 
boating and fishing and that proper boat ramps and access 
points be provided. The Council has also recommended that 
proper fire protection policies be developed and that 
all the facilities needed for its implementation be 
provided.

There are many other matters in this report of great 
interest, and I believe they should be of concern to all 
of those who are interested in preservation of the natural 
environment. As population numbers grow, this is going 
to become increasingly important. One of the things that 
needs to be understood is that if the opportunity for 
the establishment of national parks is once lost - if 
the parks are destroyed through use of a different kind, 
they can never be replaced, so what is being done here 
fits in well with the broad concept that Dick Hamer and 
his team have for the total development of Victoria and 
for the welfare of all citizens.

