<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool sales
Description: press statement
Date: 22/01/1963
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  PRESS STATEMENT :
  MuILCOLP4 FRASER:
                              January 22nd, 1963

      Malcolm Fraser said he was very pleased that the National Council of 
  Woolselling Brokers had agreed to make sale dates available to Portland for the 
  1963/64 season.
      In coming to this decision the brokers had shown that they were pre- 
  pared to accept Professor Cochrane's report, and this was a marked step forward 
  in efforts to have wool sales established at Portland, However, successful 
  wool sales cannot be held without willing co-operation of sufficient buyers to 
  make competition. Apparently the Australian Council of Woolbuyers has not yet 
  shown a willingness to accept Professor Cochrane's report and are re-affirming 
  their previous stand. There was some hope, however, that this will be altered
• because the Australian Council of Woolbuyers has apparently referred the matter 
  back to the Victorian and South Australian Association for further discussion.
      The position cannot be allowed to rest where it is with the buyers 
  thwarting the wishes and intentions of the rest of the industry. He hopes the 
  buyers will come to see that their own interests will, in the long run, be best 
  served by their own co-operation with the rest of the industry.
      It was more than regrettable that the Australian Council of Woolbuyers 
  has been unable to accept Professor Cochrane's report and recommendations as it 
  stood, but he hopes when the Victorian & South Australian Association re-assesses
*its attitude it will consider the strong wishes of the Grower Organizations, 
  Professor Cochrane's report and the changed attitude of the Woolselling Brokers.
      Malcolm Fraser said he had had discussions with representatives of the 
  three Woolgrowing Organizations in Victoria, and that he was sure that these 
  Organizations would take some further action. He understood the Graziers' 
  Association and the Victorian Wheat & Woolgrowers' Association are asking the 
  Premier to fall a meeting with representatives of the Victorian & Sth.Australian 
  Woolbuyers' Association. He supported this more and hoped the meeting would be 
  arranged speedily. The Grower Organizations, Malcolm Fraser said, have co-operated 
  very well on this matter, especially during the recent discussions. Continued
  co-operation and active initiative may well cause the buyers to reassess their 
  attitude.
      Malcolm Fraser said that he was arranging a meeting of the woolgrowers'
  deputation to discuss the position as it now stood to see if there were any 
  positive steps that the deputation could take at this stage which would further the 
  cause of Portland wool sales.

