<!--start metadata-->
Title: Social services, foreign investment
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 29/10/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                     3HA - Sunday 29 October 
                     3YB - Thursday 2 November 
    BROADCAST        3LK - Wednesday 1 November


        A great deal has been said in the last few weeks about 
    the Government's new social services provisions, and naturally 
    some of the key announcements have received the most attention. 
    Among them are the Government's undertaking to abolish the means 
    test within three years and the substantial increases in the 
    pensions. The single aged pension now stands at $20 a week, and 
    the married rate at $34,50 a week, and there have been increases 
    in other pension categories. There'll also be supplementary 
•   assistance of $4 a week for those paying rent. Now that the 
    rent allowance has been extended to married pensioner couples, the 
    total payment for married couples paying rent has risen by $6.50 
    as a result of the Budget.
        But I believe that some of the immediate benefits 
    have been overlooked in the publicity given to the proposal to 
    abolish the means test. Let me mention some. When the last 
    Labor Government went out of office in 1949, a single pensioner 
    could earn no more than $3 a week and a married couple $6 a week 
    before they lost all pension benefit. Today, a single pensioner 
    can earn up to $20 a week and still receive the entire aged 
•   pension, and a married couple may earn up to $34.50.
        The means test will be lifted altogether within three 
    years, of course. But there have been immediate changes which 
    I believe some people have not fully appreciated. Part pensions 
    are now paid to single people with incomes of up to $60 a week, 
    or with property worth up to $31,600. For married couples, 
    part pensions are available for those with incomes of up to 
    $103.50 a week or property of up to $54,600.

        Where there are dependent children, all these limits 
    are increased, and widows receive certain additional concessions 
    in relation to their property.


                            .../2

                   - 2 -



           The immediate easing of the means test will make 
     75,000 more people eligible for pensions or part pensions.


           Much of the comment about social services these days 
     is uninformed. I think one of the most telling indicators of 
     the progress we have made is calculated from a comparison 
     between pension levels and the cost of living index.


           The pension for a single person has risen from $4.25 
     a week in 1948 under the last Labor Government, to $20 a week 
     today. Over that time, the pension rate has risen a good deal 
     faster than the cost of living. In other words, the pensioner 
•    today not only receives a bigger pension than a pensioner 24 
     years ago, but the spending power of that pension has been 
     considerably expanded. On top of that, there has been considerable
     growth in fringe benefits for pensioners.
           The total welfare budget of the Commonwealth this year 
     amounts to about $2500 million, a quarter of the entire national 
     budget. While no one can be completely satisfied with the 
     provision we are able to make for the aged, the sick, the 
     handicapped, the widowed and other groups of people in special 
     need, I think I can fairly claim that never before have a 
     government's responsibilities of the nation to such people been 
     shouldered as fully as they are now.






           I now turn to another matter of great public interest - 
     the control of foreign takeovers of Australian companies.


           When the Prime Minister first announced that the 
     Commonwealth would act in this area on 26 September, there was 
     probably some scepticism as to when any action would in fact be 
     taken. Last week, the Prime Minister removed any such doubts 
     when he introduced interim legislation to implement the proposals.






                                    .../5

               -3


         Broadly, the Government undertook to establish an 
    independent authority to analyse and report on takeover proposals 
    which the Government believed should be investigated to see 
    whether they were against the national interest.

         Already, a special group of Government departmental 
    officers has been established to carry out this work pending 
    the setting up of the proposed independent authority. That 
    authority will require legislation but it will take time and we 
    expect to introduce that next year. To give legal backing to 
    the interim arrangements which we already have operating, we 
    needed Parliamentary approval of the bill the Prime Minister 
•   introduced last week.

         There are several criteria applying to foreign take-
    overs. For instance, a takeover may be treated as being
    against the national interest if the company concerned is 
    considered by the Government to be an economically strategic 
    industry leader, or to be so large that the takeover would 
    significantly affect the relative balance of Australian ownership 
    and control of the industry concerned. There are other criteria, 
    of course, but they all come back to one basic consideration - 
    whether a takeover is against the national interest.

•        Two final points. These proposals are not just words. 
    They are working, and have applied since 27 September.

         Second, the Government intends that this legislation 
    will work and will use its powers to the full to ensure that 
    foreign takeovers which are against Australia's best interests 
    are not permitted to proceed.



               .. .. .. .. ..

