<!--start metadata-->
Title: Russia and the Belgian Congo
Description: press statement
Date: 29/09/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:    29112. September, 1960,.

          RUSSIA AND THE BELGIAN CONGO.
     I apologise for the length of the statement, but in view of 
extensive Russian propaganda and publicity which has appeared throughout 
the world in recent weeks, I wanted to make every effort to have the 
true picture as regards events in the Congo circulated as widely as 
possible.
     I would appreciate it very much if you could give some 
publicity to this statement.,

     Some time ago, I issued a statement about the Belgian Congo, 
I indicated then that I thought that what had been achieved by the 
Secretary—General ,7 Mr, Hammarskjoeld, represented the United Nations' 
greatest tri mph,
     In one respect at least I spoke a little early, because 
I was not prepared, as perhaps I should have been, for the ruthless, 
irresponsible and dangerous manner in which the Russians have tried to 
ferment trouble in the Congo.
     while originally supporting the Security Council resolutions 
which gave Mr. Hammarskjoeld authority to act in the Congo, the 
Russians then decided to act upon their own behalf, and it has already 
been shown that arms from Poland had been made available to certain 
elements in the Congo, and the Russians themselves, in the Congo, 
ferried the ex—Prime Minister Lumu_mba`s troops about from point to 
point in Russian trucks and in Russian 'planes.
     All this made possible much of the massacre that has 
occurred in the Congo in the tribal warfare that has taken place.
     When I last spoke of this subject, Mr. Hs"rmarsk joeld had 
just achieved a Congo—wide United Nations garrisoning of the country. 
The difficulty began when Prime Minister Lumumba demanded that
United Nations troops be used to suppress the dissident elements 
and the dissident troops and to force Katanga Province to bow down to 
his authority.

•

              -2-
    Mrs, Hammarskjoeld at that time correctly interpreted this 
as being outside his United Nations brief. The internal form of the 
government in the Congo, the relationship with the different Provinces 
to the Central Government - these were matters for the Congolese to 
settle themselves if they could, However, since the Prime Minister 
Lumumba could not compel Mr. Hammarskjoeld and the United Nations 
forces to help in these matters he turned to the Russians for aid,
    The United Nations forces, under the Secretary-General's 
orders, had sealed off the radio stations and, for a time, the 
airports, The Russians; in their trucks and in their 'planes: 
apparently disregarded these instructions,
    The action of the Russians alone has, as I have said, made 
much of the massacre and tribal warfare of the Congo possible,
    While this was happening, things looked pretty black 
from the democratic point of view, It looked very much as though 
the Russians would get a permanent stronghold in Africa - a strong- 
hold from which it would be all too easy to spread dissension and 
sub-°ersive activities. However, at this stage, an Army Colonel 
felt that the Congo had had enough of politicians who patently 
did not know what responsibility meant and who had neither the will 
nor the desire nor the ability to maintain a responsible and stable 
government. Colonel Mobutu gained control of the country. He has 
established what could be called an executive college picked from 
leading people throughout the country to do the basic work of
government. As I understand it, these people have been appointed 
until the end of this year Colonel Mobutu's strength and determina- 
tion seems now to offer some chance that there will be some stability 
in the Congo. One of his first actions was to order the Russian 
and Czechoslovakian Embassy officials to leave the Congo. .e gave 
them about 48 hours to comply with his command, This was done. 
The Colonel clearly saw the dangers of having the Russians in the
Congo and of having a government or a Prime Minister who was becoming 
so dependent upon them for his own position,

              -3-
    This action seems to have been supported in general by most 
of the other African leaders who were also showing clearly that they 
were not happy about the extent of Russian infiltration in the Congo. 
Furthermore, there have since been resolutions by the United Nations, 
including leaders of African States, making it quite clear that they 
want no individual power to interfere in their independent countries 
of Africa and that any action that needs to be taken must be taken 
through the United Nations. This is the view that Western countries 
have tried to maintain against a background of Russian provocation 
in the Congo,
    The Russians have clearly suffered serious setbacks in 
Africa and for that we can be thankful, The Russian action in the 
Congo shows, I believe more clearly than anything they have done for 
a long time, the nature of their designs and basic objectives, That 
is because so far as their intervention was concerned the matter was 
clear cut. The United Nations was manging things well, There was 
no need for the Russians to do anything of their own initiative. 
Any aid they wanted to bring forward could and should have been 
brought forward through the United Nations, However, the very success 
of the United Nations in this field was directly opposed to Russia' s 
interests which are to gain a foothold for Communism in Africa. 
Success for the United Nations would leave Russia without a base 
for further disruptive operations, There is no doubt that, as 
opportunity permits, the Russians will mount a major offensive in 
Africa to try and gain control of the 200,000;000 people in that
country.
    It is worth noting that when the Russians begin manoeuvres 
of this kind they don't do it in the name of international
Communism which is, of course, their basic objective. They do it 
in the name of the nationalism of peoples concerned. They realise 
that Communism as such has no appeal but they dress up their own 
motives in a form which they think will appeal to the people con- 
cerned. In so doing, they do what they can to hide their own 
particular objectives. They are great artists at preaching loudly 
against Imperialism while, at the same time, they practice the

~              -4-
 worst forms of Imperialism that the world has known. If any of us 
 had thought that the Russians might be prepared to accept peaceful 
 co—existence — to live and let live — what they have done in the 
 Congo should remind us that they are still Communists.
      The Russians are now trying to disguise their defeat at 
 this stage in the Congo by an attack on Mr, Hammarskjoeld and by an 
 attack on the present organisation of the United Nations. The 
 United Nations has so far vigorously supported its Secretary—General 
 and even Mr. Nehru, who no—one would regard as a partisan in the 
 sphere of world conflict, has said that Mr, Khrushchev's proposals 
 on re—organisation of the United Nations would not work. Howeverp 
 this is a typical Russian or Communist tactic. If they suffer a 
 defeat of any kind in one sphere, they will try to divert attention 
 and change or cloud the issue. It is because Mr. Hammarskjoeld has 
 so far been most successful in the Congo despite everything that 
 Russia can and has been able to do that the Russians now want to 
 destroy him,
      The situation in the Congo is still far from settled and 
 will clearly remain unsettled for a long time until it can be
 shown conclusively that Russia's influence has been completely 
 and absolutely broken, The only chance of maintaining this position 
 lies through the United Nations and its continued support of
 Mr0 Hammarskjoeldo

