<!--start metadata-->
Title: Government Members' Committees
Description: press statement
Date: 15/03/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT                                 March 15th,1959
                   GOVERNMENT MEMBERS' COMMITTEES
              One of the first things members began in the new 
Paarliament was to reform various Government Members' Committees. 
Two of the most important of these are the Wool and the Food and 
Agriculture Committees.
              During the next fdw months it is the intention of
the Wool Committee to hold several meetings and to invite 
representatives of different sections of the Industry to discuss 
current problems relating to the Industry. The Chairman of 
the Wool Bureau, Mr. Gunn, has already attended one of the
meetings.  The Committee will also be asking representatives
of manufacturers and of our Research Organisation so that members
may have a comprehensive knowledge of current problems relating
to promotion and research. vdhen it has carried out its investigation
the Committee will hope to place a report before the Government
Parties which, we hope, will bring to light some way in which
the Government can more actively help in wool promotion.
Furthermore, marketing problems will not be ignordd.
              The Committee will enquire into the possible
alteration to the method of selling wool in addition to examining
the auction system to see if improvements cannot be made in it.
              However, there is no doubt that over the last few
years the promotional side of the wool industry has been the
weakest from every point of view, and it is the Committee's hope
that it may be able to make some contribution to the Wool Bureau's
efforts to bring energy and initiative into this sphere.
              The other Committee whose activities have a direct
relationship to Wannon is the Food and Agricultural Committee.
This Committee examines any agricultural problems not covered by
the Wool Committee. In actual fact probably 80% of its meetings
and discussions have concerned the dairy industry. During the
last Parliament airy industry representatives were invited to
Canberra to put their points of view on what has been called
the crises in the dairy industry. Very largely as a result of
these meetings the Government initiated a new guarantee for

                             2 —

dairy farmers and, at the same time, in his policy speech the

Prime Minister promised a thorough and expert review of all 
     industry
dairying/problems ; this review will be of the utmost importance

to the industry.

           The membership of the Committee will be announced 
soon, and whilst I have no inside information on this matter 

I hope the dairy industry investigation committee, which the 

Prime Minister promised in his policy speech, will be kept 
small. Its membership should not be drawn from: the industry 

itself. It would be very difficult to get adequate 

representation of all sections and groups of the industry and, 

at the same time, avoid permanent differences of opinion in

the body of the committee.  Perhaps I can make it clearer 

in this way — the Committee may well recommend that the 

Government should take some steps to convert a dairy industry 

in a certain area to some other form of production, this could 

be especially true in the high cost areas of Queensland. 

This kind of conversion could well be to the benefit of the 

farming section in the dairy industry. On the other hand, 

if there were a butter factory in this particular area the 

butter factory representatives may prefer to have an extension 

of dairying so that the output through the factory would be 
increased.

           This shows one way in which there could be a 
conflict of opinion between people in the industry. If the 

committee is composed of people who have no direct and 

personal interest in the industry but are capable of taking 
an overall view of the problems, then agreement on the

committee itself would be more easily obtained. I would 

hope that all sections of the industry, whether they be the 

dairy farmers or representatives of butter factories or 

the consumers, will be given an opportunity to give evidence 

before the committee when it is finally established.

           = %
            3 —
      The Government Members Food & Agricultural 
Committee will be watching the work of the special committee 
promised by the Prime Minister most closely. Its findings 
will be of the utmost importance to the Dairy Industry as 
a whole. The hope is that the committee will recommend a 
course of action which, over a period of time, will bring 
the dairy industry out of its present difficulties.
       The Goverment Members have already invited 
various people yo Canberra to discuss general dairying 
problems. These discussions will be an extension of those 
that were held last year, and will enable members to
review or criticise sensibly the findings that will be made 
by the special Dairy Industry Committee.
       Quite apart from the fact that these 
Government Members Committees serve a useful function by 
enabling Members to educate themselves and bring some 
thought to bear on Government policies , they also serve as 
a very useful liaison between private industry of different 
kinds and their Parliamentary representatives. This is an 
important function of these Committees which should not be 
forgotten.

