<!--start metadata-->
Title: Berlin
Description: press statement
Date: 17/09/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


             PRESS STATEMENT

                                                           september l7th,1961

                        Two or three times since the last war the Berlin issue
             has brought the world to the brink of war.   The beginning of this 

             problem is to be found in the postwar agreements which divided
             Germany into several zones for occupation purposes. Under these 

             agreements, Berlin, the capital, was to be administered as one city 
             with free access between all sectors and with French, United States 
             and United Kingdom and Russian forces in the city.
                         As events have recently shown, it is most unfortunate 
             that the Russian zone of occupation extended 110 miles west of Berlin 

             itself and thus a large part of Berlin came to be a western island 
             surrounded as some have called it by a Communist sea.
                         The postwar agreements between the Allied powers also 
             made the point that a peace treaty should finally be signed with the 
             united Germany after democratic elections had been held throughout 
             the whole of Germany.
                         What is now known as West Germany was given its freedom 

             in 1954 by the United States, the United Kingdom and France. For 
•            many years, democratic elections have been held and a democratic 
             government is in power.  West Germany had to go ahead on its own 

             in this program because the Russians resolutely refused to allow all 
             German elections and because the Russians had established a Communist 
             state in East Germany in 1949, which has come to be called the 
             German Democratic Republic.
                          The West still maintains its view that a solution to the 

             problem lies upon elections throughout the whole of Germany in 
             conformity with postwar agreements. The Russians oppose this view 
             because they know quite well that a German Communist Government in 

             Last Germany would not survive two seconds under a free election.
                          The German Democratic Republic was proclaimed in 
•            October, 1949, one year after the abhortive Berlin blockade instituted 

             by the Russians. You will remember that in 1948 the Russians closed 
             the ground corridors into West Berlin, thus trying to seal off West 

             Berlin from Western Germany and from the West. The Western Powers 
             answered this challenge by the greatest airlift in history and for 
             nearly a year west Berlin was supplied and held purely because of
             this airlift.   The Russians gave up the conflict when it was 

             patently clear that their move had not succeeded.
                          Early in 1953 there was a revolution in East Germany. 

             This revolution was put down by Russian troops. During this period, 
             the flight of refugees from East Germany through Berlin to the west
             reached over 50,000 a month for a few months. Since 1945, over 4 

             million East Germans have fled from Last Germany to the West, many
             used west Berlin as an escape hatch.  This has, quite clearly,
             greatly annoyed the East German regime and the Russians. It has 

             completely destroyed East Germanys chances for economic recovery 
             because, since the establishment of Communist East Germany in 1949,
             2 1/2 million people have fled East Germany.  Stringent measures have

                                              2


                been introduced by the East German Communist Government to prevent 

                this flight of refugees and only a few days ago we saw reports 
                of the blockade and barbed wire and tanks that have now sealed
                off East Berlin from West Berlin.  About 80,000 people who

                lived in East Berlin and who worked in West Berlin have not been 
                allowed to go to work because the German Communist Government is 
                determined to prevent any further contact with the west.
                         These measures are a last resort and are, as I understand 

                it, a further violation of agreements made after the war because 
                Berlin was to be administered as one city even though it was 

                occupied in part by the Western powers and by Russia.
                         Earlier measures to prevent this flow of refugees had
                been undertaken several years before.  In 1955 a law was made 

                in which incitement to flee from Communist East Germany was named
                as a crime against the State.  The first death sentences for this
                so called crime were passed in January, 1956.  At the same time, 

                much stricter internal travel controls and an internal passport 
•               system were rigorously supervised.
                         In December, 1957, another law was passed which made it 

                a penal offence to attempt or prepare to leave East Germany with- 
                out permission. Despite this, many many thousands of East

                Germans had been prepared to risk death and imprisonment in their
                efforts to reach the West and freedom.  The greater part of the 

                emigrants from East Germany have been young people, many of whom 
                would have grown up since 1945 and, therefore, would not have 
                known freedom except as something to dream about. It may well 

                be that the young people would be more prepared to take the risk 
                involved in fleeing the Republic but it is also significant that 
                the Communist regime has had no attraction for people who have 
•               not known anything else.

                          In recent times, food shortages and a heightened fear 
                that the proposed Peace Treaty which Mr. Krushschev wanted to 

                sign with the East Germans would close the escape route through 
                West Berlin has led to a marked increase in the flow of East
                German refugees.   During July, over 30,000 East German refugees 

                escaped and in the first week of August, 12,000 refugees escaped
                left Last Germany.   In all probability it was these escapees
                which precipitated the sealing of the Berlin borders by the East
                German Communist Government.
                           The story of the East German refugees is ample evidence
                of the failure of the Communist regime.
                           The Berlin problem is not purely a problem because of

                this question of refugees. There are between 2 and 3 million
                people in West Berlin who are free and who have their own elections -
                slightly more than one-fifth the number of people in Australia.
                           The Communist powers want more than anything else to
                submerge the present free West Berlin in Communist Germany and

                               3

this the West is determined it shall not do.   The western powers
cannot afford any further to let a victory go to the Communist 
powers by default. The United Kingdom and the United States 
have tried to make the Russians realize this by strengthening
their garrisons in West Berlin.    In this move they should have 
the support of every person who believes in freedom.

