<!--start metadata-->
Title: Operation Paddington progresses
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 13/07/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


         Forwarded to all electoral papers 18/7 DJO

 FOR P;E.SS             No. 4933
                   Directorate of Public Relations, 
                   Army Headquarters, 
                   Russell Offices, 
                   CANBERRA, A.C.T.

          OPERATION PADDINGTON PROGRESSES

    The 1st Australian Task Force is engaged on Operation Paddington - 
 the largest offensive yet mounted in Vietnam's Phuoc Tuy Province.
    It is part of an Allied force which is attempting to neutralise a 
 Viet Cong Regiment.
    The force includes an American Brigade, a Vietnamese Marine task 
 force and elements of a U.S. Armoured Cavalry Regiment.
    For the first time, the Task Force Headquarters, commanded by
 Brigadier Stuart Graham;: of Canberra, moved into the field to command 2nd 
 and 7th Battalions, the Royal Australian Regiment, 4th Field Regiment, 
 Royal Australian Artillery, "A" Squadron, 3rd Cavalry Regiment, 1st Field 
Squadron, Royal Australian Engineers, and supporting U.S. units.
    Iroquois helicopters from No. 9 Squadron, RAAF, are also engaged 
in the operation.

   From the first do:- c :' the operation, the Squadron lifted 2nd Battalion RAR 
into its battle position and has been employed on resupply of water, food and
ammunition as well as maintaining a round the clock medical evacuation 
stand-by.
   Large scale air strikes, backed by Artillery bombardment, has been 
a feature of the operation.
   The Artillery support, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Reg Gardner, 
of Canberra, is made up a Battery of Australian Artillery, a Battery of 
New Zealand Artillery, and a Battery of U.S. Artillery.
   An American Artillery Regiment, armed with 155 mm medium guns is 
also in support.
   Ground troops have made only sporadic contact with the Viet Cong.
   By the third day of the operation 23 Viet Cong had been killed and 
seven wounded.
   Allied casualties are light and tie only Australian casualty has been
Sapper Donald Spence aride, 24, of Tamwcrth, N.S.W., who died of injuries 
after being struck by a falling tree.
   Three American armoured vehicles hLve been lamaged by Viet Cong rockets 
and a command. detonated mine..
   Two Viet Cong rocket launchers and unmunition have been captured.
   One rocket launcher was found with ;1e Viet Cong operator-dead beside 
his weapon.



                            2/.

                  -2-

     A Viet Cong base camp and two rice caches, totalling 3500 lbs, 
have been captured together with a number of claymore mines, set for 
detonation.
     As combat forces continue Operation Paddington, north of the once 
Viet Cong dominated village of Xuyen Moc, civil affairs workers of the 
task force team have already moved in to give medical assistance and to 
distribute food and clothing to the people.
     The area around Xuyen Moc was cleared by the task force and Allied 
troops during Operation Portsea in March this year.
     Before that the area had been controlled by the Viet Cong for seven
years.


                     List: A.
                     Further information:
               CANBERRA: Major E. Ross-Imith
                      (65-4061) (49-6030)
13 July 1967 OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

