<!--start metadata-->
Title: Beef cattle industry, wheat industry
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 5/12/1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   BROADCAST TALK  FOR BROADCAST 3HA SUNDAY DECEMBER 5
                          3YB THURSDAY DECEMBER 9 
                          3LK MONDAY DECEMBER 6
   Hello Ladies and Gentlemen,

   The build-up in beef cattle numbers in Western Victoria in recent years 
   has been nothing short of spectacular.
   Paddocks which once held some of the best sheep in Australia are now 
   supporting a great variety of beef cattle.
   Saleyards in Warrnambool, Hamilton and Horsham all report marked increases 
   in the numbers of beef cattle being offered for sale, and importantly, 
   the prices these are bringing are holding up well. Although, if you are 
   in the position of purchasing breeding or fattening stock, high prices of 
   course lose much of their attraction.
•  What is the future of beef? Is it a boom and bust market, or is it 
   possible to plan for a long-term swing to beef production? To answer this 
   question requires a great deal of caution because there are so many 
   uncertain factors.
   However, the Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr. Doug Anthony, said after 
   his recent investigation of world markets, that he was most impressed 
   with the market prospects for beef. Consumption and demand for beef 
   products are expanding in overseas countries as living standards rise. 
   The capacity of most countries to produce more beef is such that, given 
   good management, our future must be regarded as fairly promising.
   For the year 1970-71, a total of 5.8 million cattle were slaughtered in 
   Australia, producing more than 1-million tons of beef and veal in carcase
•  weight. This is valued at $650 million. The total weight of beef and 
   veal exported in this period was 335-thousand tons, valued at more than 
   300-million dollars.
   This makes the beef industry one of the largest in Australia, and one of 
   our major earners of export income, roughly equivalent to, and possibly 
   ahead of, the wool industry.
   The total cattle population in Australia is now nearly 25-million head, 
   of which 20 million are beef cattle. This is an increase in ten per cent 
   over last year in total cattle numbers, and a thirteen per cent increase 
   in beef cattle numbers.

       BROADCAST/2...


       To put these figures into perspective, I think it is worth remembering 
       that a production of 1-million tons of beef was achieved in 1964/65 
       with slaughterings of over 6.8 million head of cattle. This year we 
       have exceeded this production with slaughterings of one million head
       fewer.

       In recent years the consistently high prices for cattle has attracted 
       significant resources into this industry, a trend which has been 
       accelerated by the low wool prices and wheat quotas, and by the 
       shift away from dairying.

       Several authorities have argued that the outlook for beef is 
       exceptionally favourable for producers, and that demand will outstrip
•      supply by a considerable margin.

       For example, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
       prepared a set of projections which indicated a possible deficit of beef 
       among O.E.C.D. countries, including Western Euro e, North America,
       Japan and Australia, o :=,::: •

       More recently, the world bank also suggested that there could be a small 
       shortfall in Western countries'' beef supplies by 1975, increasing
       even further by 1980. 4i 41,///of ~/'~~' fl " c4"-"i ~00%id 
       Mc Ad7?"; h , e,,'i~ /sal q red. /~/ y~/~ ~G o F4et tf ,6~y jgr, m?R_~',/Tr4?
       While ~-     these studies points to demand exceeding availability
       in future years, it must be remembered that the studies are based on 
       historical trends and static assumptions which may or may not be valid
       for the future.

 •     The United States market continues to be the main source of the
       industry's present prosperity, taking well over two hundred thousand 
        tons annually. But we are subject to restrictions which place an 
       annual ceiling on our shipments to that market. We have negotiated 
       hard with the Americans each year and have won annual increases in
        our entitlement.


        Certainly I believe there are strong grounds on which we can continue 
        to press for a larger share of that market in the future, and we will
        certainly be doing so.

        Turning to wheat, as you have possibly heard or read by now, the 
        Acting Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. Peter Nixon, announced last 
        week that the guaranteed price and home consumption price of wheat
        for the 1971-72 pool had been increased by four cents per bushel for

  BROADCAST/3...

  local sales and 4.3 cents for exports.

  This brings the guaranteed price which applies to 200 million bushels 
  of exports from the pool to 151.8 cents per bushel for fair average 
  quality wheat.
  These annual adjustments to prices are determined in accordance with 
  the provisions of the Wheat Industry Stabilisation Plan.

  Since the last adjustment was made, there have been increases in wages, 
  rail and other freight rates, and prices of fuel, parts and repairs.

• Wheat growers I am sure will welcome this new price. 
  Goodbye for now.










•

