<!--start metadata-->
Title: Big army exercise for Queensland
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 14/07/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


           Forwarded to all electoral papers 18/7 D.J.O.


  FOR PRESS                                                 No. 4836
                     BIG ARMY EXERCISE FOR QUEENSLAND 

                  Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
                       the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.

           A battalion group exercise involving 8th Battalion, Royal Australian 
 Regiment, plus supporting elements, will be held in the rugged, 1200 square-
 mile Shoalwater Bay Army training area, north of Rockhampton, from July 26 
 to August 8.

           The Commanding Officer of the Battalion is Lieutenant-Colonel J.O.
 Langtry.

          Announcing details of the exercise today, the Minister for the Army,
 Mr. Malcolm Fraser, said the operation, which was code named 'Noisy Pita', 
 would complete the training  cycle of 8th Battalion, which would relieve 4th 
 Battalion, Royal Australian  Regiment, in Malaysia later this year. 
          The setting of the  exercise would be one of limited warfare in
 South-East Asia.

          Troops taking part would be employed as a battalion group operating
 as part of a task force, and supported from a simulated task force maintenance 
 area.

          About 1500 troops would be engaged, and  'Noisy Pita' would follow
 the same pattern as other Army exercises held in  the Shoalwater Bay area 
 earlier this year.

          A number of types of operations would be covered, including cordon 
 and search, search and destroy, ambush and counter-ambush, and attacks on 
 fortified camps.

          'Noisy Pita' was also designed to improve certain techniques at sub- 
 unit level. These would include patrolling, adequate night defensive 

 techniques, co-ordination and control by junior leaders during hasty defence, 
 quick reaction to information received, correct and timely use of battalion 
support weapons, control of artillery fire, and platoon and company 
administration, including water conservation.


                                         Lists: A, B and C.
                                         Further information:
                             CANBERRA: Major E. Ross-Smith (65-4061) (49-6030 
14 July 1967             OTHEI STATES: PRO AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

