<!--start metadata-->
Title: 7 RAR successful operation
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 10/05/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       Sentto Electorate Newspapers; Freeth; White; Lehmann; McKellar
•  2•                         15/5/67 DJO
  f     EMBARGO - NOT TO BE BROADCAST OR PUBLISHED BEFOR.:: 7PM 
            EST WEDNESDAY MAY 10.
    FOR PRESS                No. 4858
                       Directorate of Public Relations, 
                       Army Headquarters, 
                       CANBERRA, A.C.T.

              7 RAR STJCCESSFUL OPERATION

        Troops of 7th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment had their first 
    clash with Vietcong while on operations in Phuoc Tuy Province this week.
        On their first major search and destroy mission, called Operation
    Lismore, Australians killed five Vietcong, wounded three and followed 
    many other blood trails, and detained six suspects.
        The Battalion successfully used its tracker dogs, black labradors
    Justin and Cassius, for the first time to hunt a wounded soldier and
    follow blood trails. There were two minor Australian casualties. Their 
    names have already been announced.
       Supported by New Zealand and American artillery, Australian
    armoured personnel carriers of 3rd Cavalry Regiment and American gunship
    helicopters, Operation Lismore was a massive helicopter borne assault 
    followed by a seven day search and destroy mission.
       Troops were lifted from Nui Dat in waves of armed American Iriquois 
    helicopters to a four square mile padi field landing zone under protective 
    air cover.
       The troops searched south east of the Australian Task Force base 
    through a known Vietcong supply route area which included stretches of the 
    Song Rai, a river used by the enemy to ferry supplies and equipment from 
    the South China Sea into Phuoc Tuy Province.
       On the second day of the operation, contact was made with a group
    of Vietcong who were holding six Vietnamese prisoners. The communist
    troops shot four of the prisoners before fleeing into the jungle with the 
    remaining two.
       The four wounded Vietnamese were found with their hands bound with 
    wire and their feet tied to a long iron bar. Despite urgent attention by 
    Australian medics one Vietnamese died.

       The others were given field treatment and evacuated by helicopter 
    to the Task Force Aid Post at Nui Dat.
       Australian Army Doctor, Captain Jack Bloriley, of Newcastle, gave 
    emergency treatment to two of the badly wounded Vietnamese..
       After treatment at Task Force they were flown to Long Binh hospital 
    for extensive surgery.
       Further contact the same day resulted in one Vietcong dead and a 
    number wóunded. Tracker dog teams flown in from base followed blood trails 
    that led to further contacts and one Vietcong killed.
       Documents identified the Vietcong as troops of the Reconnaissance 
    and Sabotage Company of D445 Battalion. This was one of the enemy 
    battalions badly mauled by troops of 6th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment 
    in the battle of Long Tan last August and again during Operation Bribie
    in February.                2/...

                -2-
    At least 15 other contacts with Vietcong were made during the 
 operation but the number of enemy casualties could not be established 
although numerous blood trails were found.
    During Operation Lismore, 7th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment 
destroyed about 30 enemy bunkers, 10 large weapon pits, a sampan, a number
of Vietcong base installations, and captured three tons of rice and some 
enemy weapons.
    A quantity of enemy documents was taken plus the packs of a 
Vietcong group who dropped them while fleeing. Vietcong armourers tools, 
booby trap manufacturing equipment, and a number of booby traps, were also 
captured when the Australians destroyed an enemy mine and booby trap school.
    They also took an enemy base camp measuring 200 by 100 metres, 
and destroyed five Vietcong fish camps.
    Task Force Commander, Brigadier Stuart Graham, said the most 
significant feature of Operation Lismore was that it helped destroy plans
believed made by the Vietcong to mount attacks on both civilian and military 
targets in the area.
    The attacks had been planned for Sunday May 7 to coincide with the 
anniversary of the fall of Dien Bien Phu during the Indo China war between 
the French and the Viet Minh. Reports of planned targets for Vietcong 
attack had included the Australian base at Nui Dat.
    "From the number of small groups of Vietcong contacted by 7th
Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment during the operation it was obvious 
that attack plans had been made," Brigadier Graham said.
    "We believe the operation helped destroy Vietcong planning in the 
area. The operation also continued the process of separating main Vietcong 
forces from local guerillas in Phuoc Tuy Province by physically denying them
the transit routes and staging camps set up between the two Vietcong 
forces,4" he added.


                Lists: A and B
                Further information:
           CANBERRA: Major Allan S. Hinds
                 (65-4061) (49-6030)
          OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS


10 May 1967 •

