<!--start metadata-->
Title: Post and telegraph charges
Description: press statement
Date: 30/08/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


MALCOLM FRASER  PRESS STATEMENTAugust 30th,1959
               POST & TELEGRAPH CHARGES
            Nobody likes tohave to pay more for any goods or 
service which they must buy and this applies to the services supplied 
by the Postmaster-General's Department as much as it does to anything else. 
There has, understabdably, been quite an amount of opposition to the new 
postal, telephone and telegraph charges announced in the recent budget, 
Some of th is opposition has been strongly based, especially so far as 
bulk postage is concerned.
            As a result of the representations made by back- 
benchers and others modifications were made in the Government's original 
proposals. Representations on other matters were also made but to no 
avail. Even thoughtit is an unpopular increase there is much reason 
in what the Government has done.
            For many years the Post Office's expansion has been 
financed entirely out of ordinary taxation revenue. The Post Office 
has made no provision for financing the future capital expansion of its 
Department. In part, at least, these increased charges mean that where 
expansion has previously been financed through taxation it will now be 
financed in part by those using the services in the charges they pay for 
them. For business reasons sound arguments can be given for extending 
this principle further, •:but for national reasons I personally don't want 
to see the position carried too far. There are certain services which 
the Post Office supplies which can never be self-sufficient. Telephone 
communications in remote areas provide one example of this. If people 
in the backblocks were only given a service when there were enough of them 
to make that service a payable proposition then they would be left
without communication much longer than they should be.
            Although the Post Office is Australia's greatest
business undertaking it is quite true that there is an obligation on 
the Department to supply services at reasonable cost to the remote and 
undeveloped parts of this country. In general the Department has done 
this. Therefore, while the present budget taxes are a small step in 
putting the Post Office on a business foundation where it will finance 
some of its own capital expansion. I feel there is a limit to how far
this policy can be taken.

                                  2
                  Somebody asked me the other day what was the need 
 to increase post office charges when the department made a profit last 
 year. This is only part of the truth. Overall the department made 
 a small profit of £3. or £4 million so far as its trading operations 
 are concerned, but this profit did not take into account the capital 
 involved or the need to provide further capital for the future. 
 Furthermore, it is worth noting that over recent times Post Office 
 charges have not increased proportionately anything like as much as 
 the basic wage,
                  I hope thate people who are annoyed at certain 
 items in the Postmaster-General's proposals as they affect them will 
 not forget the significance of two most important changes that have 
 been introduced Which will greatly benefit the country areas of 
 Australia. Although postage rates have been increased ld, the 
 airmail surcharge has been abolished and letters will now be
 carried automatically by the fastest possible means. This is a 
 great step forward and gives to rural areas the same service as 
 applies in the metropolitan areas without extra charge.
                 Secondly, a completely new national telephone 
 policy will be introduced fr m 1st Mgay,1960 when full details are
 worked out.   At the present time any call which involves two
 exchanges is classed as a trunk call. This is to the great
 disadvantage of country areas where probably three-quarters of
 all calls would be trunk ones. Under the new plan several country
 exchanges will be grouped together into zones and a call anywhere
 in that zone will be classed as a local call on an untimed basis, Under
 this policy I hope nearly all rural areas will find their local
 exchange grouped at their business centre so that calls to the local
 town, to the baker, butcher and the grocer will be classed as local
 and not trunk calls.
                 This greatly improved service will be supplied at
 a cost of an extra ld, for local calls which is, of course, also
 payable in the metropolitan areas. This is a sound step towards 
placing rural telephone subscribers on the same basis as metropolitan 
users so far as local calls are concerned. The exact zoned areas

                                1.0

will not be known until the department completes its detailed 
plans.
            The budget proposals concerning the Postmaster— 
General's Department are a result of two things. First, a
desire to place the post office on a business footing.    I 
support this policy with reservations as I have explained. 
            The second purpose of the budget proposals is to 
try to give country users a service more like that enjoyed
by city users at no extra charge.      I support this 
enthusiastically.

