<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural industry
Description: Broadcast
Date: 22/04/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                SUNDAY, 22ND APRIL    3HA
RADIO BROADCAST                 WEDNESDAY, 25TH APRIL 3LK
                                THURSDAY, 26TH APRIL  3YB




Rural industries are going to be in for a difficult and hard 
time in negotiating with the Commonwealth Government. The 
two members who knew something of rural affairs, Dr. Patterson 
and Mr. Grassby, have been given no responsibility for rural 
affairs. The Prime Minister was not even prepared to have 
one of them as Acting Minister while Senator Wreidt was 
overseas. Senator Cavanagh, whose knowledge of the problems 
was no greater than Senator Wreidt's when he first began, 
is acting.

A number of decisions have been taken without adequate 
consultation with primary industry leaders. This is one 
of the matters which gives most cause for concern. I have 
heard of no rural organisation that wants the referendum 
of the Merino Embargo. The Government is determined to 
have one. Despite the unanimous advice of the Executive 
of the Wool Industry Conference, it is determined to have 
one because the organisation which. controls Labor Party 
members has said it must. Without consultation, the 
Rural Reconstruction Funds were cut in half and an attempt 
was made to increase the interest rate - an attempt which 
was thwarted by the States.

Rural industries which have lost up to 200 million dollars 
as a result of revaluation have been virtually ignored for 
revaluation compensation, despite the fact that before 
Christmas, Mr. Crean said the Government would keep to 
the principles of the practices of the previous Government. 
It was not long after that that Senator Wreidt macle it plain 
that our practices had been thrown out of the window. We 
now come to the incredible situation in which revaluation 
compensation was announced on the 11th of April for secondary 
industries where there are significant exporters but not 
for primary industries. We've had an Electoral Bill introduced, 
which I believe the Senate will reject, which was opposed by 
the Liberal Party and the Country Party in the House of 
Representatives.

This Bill will move up to ten seats from large country areas 
where members have great problems of distance interviewing 
their electors in the remote areas to the metropolitan areas. 
The Government's legislation will mean that there will be 
less burdensome seats in developing metropolitan areas 
than there would be in an electorate like Kennedy in
Queensland, Kalgoorlie in Western Australia, or Wannon 
in this area.

It is a ludicrous situation and one designed to perpetuate 
the particular rules. The object i3 to destroy the country 
voice in Parliament. It is only the first step because 
they have been served notice that if they ever regain 
Government, first past the post voting will be introduced 
with disastrous results for small parties and for rural areas.

Before the elections, we were told that there would be

              -2




500 million dollars at 3% interest for primary producers. That 
promise has been forgotten. Instead, the Rural Reconstruction 
Funds were cut in half. What has been done with Wool Research 
and Promotion Funds for the International Wool Secretariat 
represents an enormous change from the previous Government's 
policies. The decision announced recently has indicated a 
70% increase in the growers' contribution and a one-third 
reduction in the Government's contribution.

The Minister for Primary Industry has made it plain that the 
Government isn't bound by our previous policies and that 
Government sponsored research for all rural industries is 
being reviewed. It would be more correct to say that it is 
under threat.

One of the matters that must give general cause for concern 
is the fact that most of these changes have been taken without 
the intimate and close consultation that used to prevail 
between the previous Government and Primary Industry 
Organisations. Primary producers now know that whatever 
advice they offer will not be able to prevail against the 
doctriny of views of the Government, of the Labor Party.

The Government has made many promises. With a budget deficit 
approaching a thousand million, they are going to have more 
than a little difficulty in fulfilling those promises. 
Mr. Whitlam has appointed a demolition squad to advise him 
on areas of government spending that could be pruned and altered. 
This team, which is headed by Dr. Coombes, will be looking to 
cut funds in rural industry areas. It's a task force that 
primary industry organisations will need to watch with concern.

This is the background against which a new situation has 
developed. We are now threatened with Australia's meat 
trade being disrupted, not only by unions, but by arbitrary 
Government actions. There are reports that the Government 
is considering measures which would arbitrarily curtail 
exports. It is my understanding that requests for policy 
proposals were first put to the Department of Primary Industry 
and when that indicated the impossibility of the particular 
requests demanded from the Government, the hot potato was 
thrown into the lap of the Australian Meat Board. But I am 
told that two proposals were under consideration: one, a 
thirty percent export tax; or, secondly, a quota on exports. 
Either proposal would be quite disastrous for the meat industry 
and for Australia.

While it is true that meat prices have risen significantly in 
recent months, it is my understanding that• meat prices have 
now about the same relation to the average wage they had ten 
years ago. Australian householders have benefitted from 
low mutton and lamb prices in recent years because of drought 
and forced selling in many instances. It should be rioted that

                          - 3




an average Australian works less time to buy lamb or beef 
than his counterpart in the United States, Canada, the United 
Kingdom, Sweden or France.

The drought is now over. Owners are re-stocking. There is
a scarcity which always occurs after the breaking of a general
Australia-wide drought. If the Government uses these
circumstances' to provide an excuse for arbitrarily limiting
exports, great damage will be done to our reputation as a
reliable trading partner. It is not always realised that
our meat exporters undertake more commitments. They sign
firm contracts to deliver specific quantities and types of
meat for a long while ahead. If their contracts are upset
by arbitrary action, our reputation will be severely damaged.
Markets that we've developed can be exploited by other producers.
If there was arbitrary reduction of supplies to the United
States, under present circumstances, we would have precisely
the situation in which the United States would be inclined
to devote not ten, but hundreds of millions of dollars for
the development of synthetic meats. She would do this for
two reasons: to reduce her requirements for overseas funds;
and, secondly, to reduce her dependence upon a country that
has branded itself as an unreliable trading partner.

The meat industry faces a very serious situation indeed. 
Unfortunately, the lack of sympathy and understanding that the 
Government has shown for rural matters can give us no cause 
to believe that they will act in the interests of primary 
producers and of Australia in this particular matter.

There is a great future ahead for beef. People believe, on 
good advice, that Australia's beef herds have a capacity to 
expand from 28 to 40 million and that there are world markets 
available and ready to absorb this additional production. 
If our entry into export markets is to be arbitrarily curtailed 
and if there is to be arbitrary Government interference in a
great industry, we might well find in Australia the same 
kind of circumstances which occurred in the Argentine where 
instead of increasing, the herds actually began to diminish 
and fall.

I hope Australia's primary producer organisations will watch 
this situation very closely indeed. The Liberal Party and 
the Liberal Party Rural Committee will certainly be doing so.

