<!--start metadata-->
Title: Duntroon affiliation with University of New South Wales
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 18/07/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 FOR PRESS                                              No. 4940
       DUNTROON AFFILIATION WITH UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALS 

                Statement by the Minister for the Army, 
                     the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P.
         It was announced today in a joint statement issued by the Minister 
 for the Army, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, and the Vice-Chancellor of the University 
 of New South Wales, Sir Philip Baxter, that the University and the
 Department of the Army have agreed to affiliate the Royal Military College, 
 Duntroon, with the University.
        The University will establish a Faculty ofMilitary Studies at
 Duntroon which will be responsible for the conduct of courses leading to
 the degrees of Bachelor of Science in Military Studies, B.Sc. (Mil), and 
 Bachelor of Arts in Military Studies, B.A. (Mil).
        Provision has been made for the continued employment of members of
 the present staff of RMC and for additional appointments by the University 
 as and when required.
        The new arrangement is consistent with the ultimate aim of establishing
,degree-granting autonomy in the military studies field. It is hoped to 
 achieve this within a period of 10 years.
        Mr, Fraser paid tribute to the progressive outlook of the University of 
N.S.'J. and the high degree of cooperation it displayed during the entire
negotiations,
                                     Further information:
                           CANBERRA: Major E. Ross-Smith
                                        (65-4061) (49-6030)
                       OTHER STATES: ADPR AT COMMAND HE AD;pARTEf S 
18 July 1967                         Lists: A and B.

