<!--start metadata-->
Title: Means test
Description: press statement
Date: 25/10/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


   PRESS STATEMENT                             October 25th,1959
   MALCOLM FRASER
                Two or three weeks ago I promised a separate statement
on the means test.   This is it.
                I think some confusion has developed in people's minds
over the question of the means test. People think — abolish the means 
test and real hardship will be reduced. This is quite untrue. Abolishing 
the means test would not affect the pensioner with nothing but the pension; 
indeed it could well make him worse off. If the Government considers 
it can afford to spend an extra £12 to £15 million on pensions in one
particular year, that will give the pensioners a rise of 7/6d. to 10/— 
a week. If the means test were abolished the money available would be 
spread much more thinly and the weekly increase would probably be in the 
order of 2/6d. In other words, a weekly increase of 10% without a 
means test would cost about £30 million.
               Quite apart from this the cost of abolishing the means 
test today would be enormous, and whether the scheme is financed out of 
taxation or out of additional levies, which would go under the name of 
a National Superannuation Scheme, the result remains the same — the money 
would have to be found. Conservative figures are these to abolish the 
means test:--
               For all persons over 70 the cost would be £40 million; 
for all those persons over 65 the cost would be a further £40 million, 
and to abolish the means test for women over 60 would cost a further
£40 million, making a total of at least £120 million. This is a vast 
expense, and one which may be difficult to justify when we consider that 
it would do nothing to relieve hardship in cases of real difficulty. 
Indeed the countries which have abolished the means test, such as the 
United Kingdom and New Zealand, have both found that they have had to 
re—introduce a means test for what they call a supplementary hardship 
pension. In other words, there was not enough money in the National 
Exchequer to pay everyone a pension that was reasonable. To make the 
conditions of people with nothing but the pension tolerable they found 
they had to introduce a supplementary hardship allowance for which there
is a means test.   The proportion of people getting the supplementary 
allowance in both countries is now between 25% and 30%. Australia
would almost inevitably find itself forced to make the same kind of 
arrangement.

                                   2

            If abolition of the means test continues to prove too costly, 
and if we can all realise that abolition of the means test does not 
provide an answer to the problems of real hardship, then we must look 
for alternative methods to overcome this problem. There is no doubt 
that in some cases the present means test incurs some hardship and 
encourages subterfuge, e.g. if people have saved a certain amount they 
are encouraged to giv their savings to their families or to hide them 
in other ways, so that their savings will not debar them from a pension.
However, I don't think it is generally realised that it is possible     ' 
to invest savings (which would otherwise be held as money in the Bank 
or as Government Bonds) in the form of an annuity which guarantees the 
pensioner a certain weekly income for the rest of his life in addition 
to his pension.
             Income from an annuity, to the value of £7 a week for a 
married couple, does not count for means test purposes, whereas if the 
original capital were held it would count for means test purposes,
             The drawback in buying an annuity is that the pensioner
forfeits any claim to the capital in return for a guaranteed weekly 
income for life. The pensioner therefore cannot leave that capital 
to his children. This is wrong because this right is one of the most 
powerful motives to thrift in our community.
             Let me conclude in this way. The means test is liberal
in that it allows a person or married couple to have a home of any 
value, all its contents and a car without any reduction in pension. In 
addition, they can have a weekly income of up to 70/- a week by way 
of annuity each in addition to a pension, Under these arrangements a 
pensioner couple can have a comfortable old age and £16.10,0. a week 
free of tax.
             On the other hand, the means test is hard on those who
have saved a few hundred or a fdw thousand pounds and who do not wish
to invest this money in a better house or in an annuity.    Such people 
often have a smaller income than those on the pension only. It is 
true that pensioners can make arrangemehts that will avoid this sort 
of situation, but there is no real reason why they should be forced to 
"Hide" their capital by means both legal and illegal to enable them
to qualify for the pension. However, if there is any one who feels

he may not have arranged his resources in the best way to take the 
maximum advantage of present Social Services legislation I would 
strongly recommend contacting the local Social Service Office or 
myself.
      Finally, I hope that the review to be undertaken well 
before the next Budget, as promised by the Prime Minister, will do 
away with these anomalies.

