<!--start metadata-->
Title: Research Grants Committee, Czechoslovakia
Description: radio talk
Date: 27/10/1968
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       ?
 RADIO TALK BY THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SCIENCE AND
 MEMBER FOR WANNON, MR MALCOLM FRASER 
 27 OCTOBER, 1968
   During the week I tabled in Parliament details of the 
financial assistance to be made available by the Commonwealth 
next year for research projects recommended by the Australian 
Research Grants Committee. This is the committee established in 
1965 by the Commonwealth to carry out the Government's aim for 
stimulation of high level research out in universities and other 
institutions by individuals or research teams. An advisory 
committee, headed by Professor R.N. Robertson, a world ranking 
plant physiologist and a former member of the C.S.I.R.O. executive, 
was established to advise the Government on applications made for 
help under the scheme. The Government set aside $9 million in 
1967-69, to cover the entire cost of grants made under the scheme 
for the triennium.
   In a world environment of rapidly expanding technology, there 
is a continuing need for research in the basic sciences. At this 
basic level, the scientist searches for new theories, for new ideas. 
This is research on the frontiers of scientific exploration. 
Then we have the applied fields, where research is geared towards 
the immediate needs of this country in agriculture, and the chemical 
and biological fields — the application throughout industry of new 
techniques based on new discoveries. The Australian Research Grants 
Committee scheme provides a pool of knowledge on which the hungry 
demands of technology can feed. The scheme also supports projects 
in the field of research which has more direct application to 
problems of national interest. When projects supported by these 
funds become promising and are developed to advanced levels, the 
stage has been reached when other support schemes take over. They 
then come within the interest of institutions like the C.S.I.R.O. 
and the National Health and Medical Research Council, or are 
carried forward through assistance from funds like the industry 
research funds in wheat, meat and wool, or through the research 
program operated by the Industrial Development Board.
   The Commonwealth has thus demonstrated its desire to assist 
the advance of science over a wide scale of endeavour. It starts 
in the secondary schools, with the Commonwealth's substantial 
program for the building and equipping of science laboratories 
in government and independent fields. Funds devoted to this 
totalled more than $42 million in 1964/68 and nearly $38 millinn 
has been earmarked for the current period running until June, 1971. 
The Government's new $27 million scheme providing libraries in all 
secondary schools will also be a significant contribution to 
science training. And with the A.R.G.C. scheme, Commonwealth 
support goes right up to the post—doctoral level to support the 
type of advanced and in some cases world standard research we have 
been discussing.

•

                    —2—

        Since the Australian Research Grants Committee was established,
     the general pattern has been that most of the funds have gone to 
     support the physical and biological sciences, but there has been 
     significant support also for the social sciences and the humanities. 
     Altogether, 572 projects will receive support from the total of 
     nearly $3 million to be apportioned by the Committee in 1969. This 
     sum is the balance of the $9 million provided under the A.R.G.C. 
     program for 1967-69.
        These 572 projects cover a wide sweep of science.... mining 
     and metals, the building industry, communications; agriculture; 
     the chemical sciences — the search for new insecticides; drugs 
     of many types; and the social sciences and humanities -- economics, 
     law, politics. More than $670,000 goes± projects carried on in 
     institutions in Victoria.
        Problems of national interest are being grappled with in many 
     of the projects receiving support under the scheme. Dr B.R. Davidson, 
     of the University of Sydney, receives $3,390 for his work on the 
     economic effects of declining wool prices on Australian agriculture. 
     Professor D.B. Williams receives $4610 to enable him to continue *ith 
     his study into changes in the rural workforce. Mr F.W. Musgrave, 
     of New England, is supported for his investigation into productivity 
     and technical change in Australian agriculture.
        The attack on biological problems is helped along by grants 
     from the A.R.G.C. fund. A sum of more than $50,000 has been provided 
     for world at the famous Walter and Eliza Hall Institute under Professor 
     G.J.V. Nossal, to support studies in the important basic features of 
     immunology and cancer research.
        The struggle to control insect pests goes on. This has 
     attracted interest from the Research Grants Committee, and the 
     Government has agreed to allot more than $70,700 to Professor 
     G.W.K. Cavill and. Dr P.L. Robertson, of the University of New 
     South Wales for their work in studying the venoms, attractants 
     and repellents of Australian insects with some hope of finding 
     chemicals useful in their control.
         In the preamble to the Charter of the United Nations, 
     the determination of member peoples is proclaimed 'to reaffirm
     faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of
     the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations
     large and small.' The signatories of the Charter also declared
      'to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one
     another as good neighbours.'/3

            -3—

   The echoes to the declaration of these precepts were very
hollow indeed when the issue of Czechoslovakia unfolded before us
in recent times. There was no cognisance of equal rights of nations,
no demonstration of tolerance and peaceful intent with one's
neighbours in the brutal overrunning of that hapless country by
Russia and her Warsaw satellites.
   It was interesting to hear the Australian Minister for
External Affairs, Mr Hasluck, speak on the issue of relations
between nations in the United Nations General Assembly earlier
this month. The aggression against Czechoslovakia, he said, had
cast new doubt on the attitude of the Soviet Union towards the
provisions of the Charter of the U.N., which quite clearly forbid
the threat or use of force against a nation.
   He pointed out that the soviet union had argued that relations
between member countries of the Warsaw Pact were an internal
matter and not the concern of other countries. But what this
really amounted to was a stance by the Soviet Union that Warsaw
Pact members were not to be regarded as independent members of
the United Nations and so were not entitled to the protection of
the Charter. The External Affairs Minister contrasted this
attitude of the so—called 'Socialist Commonwealth' with the
British Commonwealth, an essential element of which was the freedom
of any one of its members to leave the Commonwea]th if it wishes
to do so. However, the Soviet Union apparently did not recognise
the right of members in its grouping to leave — further, Soviet Union
Foreign Minister Gromyko and other Russian authorities had spoken
out against any such right.
   So much for the rights of nations:
   Not everyone is fully convinced that the vast funds spent
on manned journeys into space are justified, but few could have
failed to be stirred by pride when Apollo 7 returned to earth
from a record tour of space this week. The astronauts Commander
Schirra, Major Donn Eisele, and Walter Cunningham landed safely
after the world's longest earth—orbiting flight, covering more than
four million miles. Experts regarded the success of the flight
as paving the way for a moon—orbiting flight by two astronauts
next Christmas, and leading up to a moon landing some time next year
or early 1970. While those back on earth may derive little
apparent benefit from these exploits of space, they serve to demon-
strate man's relentless mission not only to penetrate the darkness
of the secrets locked within his own planet but to make an intrepid
assault on those fascinating problems beyond.

