<!--start metadata-->
Title: Proposed national insurance office
Description: electoral talk
Date: 10/05/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  I?LI+'C" 1'nl'AI, TALKI'or Sunday May 10 3fíA 
                        And Thursday May 14 3Y0'

     The Proposed National Insurance Office

 The bill to set up an Australian Government Insurance Office 
 which is due to come before the House in the next few days
 contains provisions which are deplorable and which the 
 Opposition condemns.


 The Government has completely failed to justify its 
 decisión to setup an Australian Government Insurance 
 Office to compet with private insurance companies.


 There are Government insurance offices in Australia, operated 
 by State Governments. Generally they run at heavy losses 
 and generally they cannot offer better terms to private 
 insurance holders than the private insurance companies.

 The prospect on this evidence is that the proposed Australian 
 Government Insurance Office will be an unnecessary additional
~ burden on Australían.taxpayers.


 The Government has said that theproposed new national
 insúrance office will compete fairly with the private 
 companies.


However the Bill contains many examples of substantial 
advantages for the Government insurance office which will. 
mean that the private'compapies must suffer.

              -2--
'l'hu:; . the bill l does` not clearly make the government insurance
,office subject' to the trade practices act, as the private 
companiesare.

This opens up the possibility that the proposed government office 
could engage in exclusive dealings, say with the Post Office, or 
the Commonwealth Bank.

Similarly it appears to be exempt from the provisions of the act 
relating to Monopolisation, Consumer Protection and restrictions 
on advertising. The managers of the government insurance offices 
investment fund would appear to be exempt from the controls 
over the private fund managers imposed under the Corporations
and Securities Bill.

The new insurance office would not have to comply with the 
State Companies Acts, which are costly obligations on private
industry,

t: would be expressly exempt from the insurance acts which lay 
down the terms on which the insurance companies operate.

Private companies which get into trouble could be taken over 
by the government insurance offide, on the appearance of the 
present. legislation. But private insurance companies which 
sought to do so would most likely find themselves in breach of 
the monopoly provisions of the Trade Practices Act.

   one part of the bill gives the government insurance office,          icco
   pow    to decide that those classes of insurance which it
   cannot undertake on a commercial basis are in the national 
   intere.st.


   However if competition were to be fair, then it should be able 
 .to do this only if no insurance company could handle such 
  business on ordinary commercial principles.


  The bill provides the new government insurance office with 
  a grant of 800',000 dollars, which is to be interest free. 
  There is provision for the Treasury to make further grants
  on which it Would not be obliged to charge commeréial rates 
  of interest.


  The Government is planning to have the government insurance
• office take over the housing loan insurance corporation for
  200,000 dollars. However this corporation has reserves of 
 seven million dollars.


 These are some of the unfair advantages which the government
 insurance office would have.


 It is no wonder that the industry is convinced that the office 
 is part of a package of proposals aimed at nationalising the 
 industry and at bringing the huge capacity of this industry
 to invest in private enterprise under-the control of the 
Government.

           -4-
There is a need for a national disaster fund, but l 
understand the insurance industry has drawn up proposals 
to meet this requirement

The Opposition currently has the bill under consideration 
and no final decisions have yet been made,

However, it is clear that the bill would give the Government 
Corporation enormous and unfair advantages in many areas 
where there can be•no economic or social purpose for the
ói11`.

Its character is utterly contrary to our Liberal philosophy.

