<!--start metadata-->
Title: Individualism and government
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 29/06/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       17J- [102. '° 2f~.I~.~_'   r T~                            For ;,tïndaV 29th June 19%5

                                                                                  & Thursday 3rd July - c,-, t_-           _~.




                               •
                       TZ-il?. F-tC:)N. MEMBER FOR WANNON - MALCOLM FRASf:.Iï



                       Individualism and Government


                       A crucial political choice has emerged over the past two 
                       years with special clarity.

                       It is the position of the individual in a bureaucratic 
                       and centralised society.


                       The problem is not unique to Australia, and it is one with 
                       which no western country has successfully coped.


                       In Australia it has-been aggravated because, far from 
                       recognising any problem of individual freedom and rights, 
                      the Government has deliberately set about increasing the
                      power of the central government and the bureaucracy.

                      At all levels people in Australia are finding that 
                      decisions about their lives are being taken in Canberra,
                      where once the decisions were taken at local or State 
                      levels.


                      The nation is now at a major turning point, where we must 
                      decide whether to allow centralised bureaucracy to take us
                      over, or whether the rights and the role of the individual 
                      should be asserted once more.


                      We must decide whether we continue at breakneck speed
                      towards 'a big brother society run by bureaucrats in 
                      Canberra, or towards a society where there is a genuine
                      respect for the capacity of people to control their own 
                      lives.


                      The legislation which the Government is pushing through, 
                      to set up a government insurance corporation, to control 
•                   public companies and to regulate the securities industry,
                    to set up an interstate commission over transport, all 
                    have one characteristic in common.


                    They increase the powers of Ministers, public servants,
                    and government commissions, and they accordingly restrict 
                    the scope-of individuals.


                    The process of inflation fits in with this process. Public 
                    institutions, companies, nursing homes, industries generally, 
                    are being forced to seek Government help by rising costs, 
                    fal]ing demand and the general economic dislocation.

                    They find they can get it, often freely, but the price they 
                    pay is centralised bureaucratic control from Canberra. 
                    They are no longer running their own show. As individuals 
                    they are diminished, robbed of part of their independence.





                                                                                                                                      /2

•                           2.


    The same thing is happening to the ordinary taxpayer 
    when he works overtime.. The Government takes 48 cents 
    of each additional dollar that he earns, and it is 
    Canberra who decides how that money is to be spent.

    The cause may be worthy, or it may be an extravagance.

    But the fundamental principle that Governments should 
    maximise their control over resources is wrong.

    There are obvious, immediate, administrative steps 
    which can be taken to arrest the growth of Government 
    and to restore the role of the individual.

    Inflation must be controlled, not only to revive the 
    economy, but also because inflation makes it easy for 
    Governments to grab resources.

    There must be a major restructuring of the tax system 
    for the same reason: to prevent Governments from 
    profiting from inflation.


    Government expenditure, which is a major cause of 
    inflation, must be cut back, and money returned to the 
    pockets of the taxpayers and to the reserves of private 
    enterprise, so that jobs can be created and so that 
    people can determine their own future.


    The Environment

    One area where policies and attitudes have been developed
    very much because of our concern for the individual is 
    that of the environment.


    The Opposition Parties are not concerned only with the 
    development of Australia but also to establish the best 
    conditions for people to live in Australia.

    It is a cause which led me in 1965 to become a foundation 
    member of the Australian Conservation Foundation.

    The preservation of land in its natural state is a
    responsibility that we in our generation owe to the 
    generations to come.

    The Opposition Parties support the establishment of 
    national parks.

    Environmental impact statements were introduced by 
    earlier. Governments and the system was continued by the 
    present Government. Although it proclaimed its support 
    for the principle, it broke that principle in the case 
    of Fraser Island. The Government approved sand mining 
    on Fraser Island without requiring.a Commonwealth 
    Environment Impact Study before the decision was taken.




                             3

                             3.


     There is a balance to be struck between the need to 
     conserve and protect the environment and the need to 
     continue Australian development.

     To reach that balance requires careful and dispassionate 
     consideration. Extremism on either side is damaging to 
     the causes both of progress and conservation.

     Victoria's Land Conservation Council which makes public 
     recommendations to the Minister for Conservation on the 
     use of Victorian State land is an example of a successful 
     approach to environmental problems.

     The appointment of the Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Cairns 
     would appear to be an example of a wrong approach.

     I believe he will bring unnecessary conflict through his 
     political extremism, into an area which requires reason 
     and commonsense.

     The Opposition strongly supports the cause of the 
     environment.
•    We hope that this appointment does not mean that the 
     environment is to be made a political football.

