<!--start metadata-->
Title: National security
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 5/11/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                       41,5( 7 1, <


                    3HA - Sunday, 5 November 1972 
                    3YB - Thursday, 9 November 1972 
    BROADCAST       3I,K - Wednesday, 8 November 1972


       In recent months Australian political debate has been 
    dominated by what may be called domestic issues and there is good 
    reason for this.

        The Government has been setting the pace and it is in 
    these areas such as Social Services, Health and Welfare, Housing 
    and Education that we have made some pretty substantial progress. 
    Although I have been very pleased to see debate revolving around 
•   these matters - our pension increases, impending abolition of 
    the means test, new Commonwealth scholarships, and so on - I 
    have been concerned that relatively little attention has been 
    paid to one of the most fundamental of issues - defence and
    foreign policy.

        Our national security is basic to all these things and 
    I am afraid that our political opponents are doing a good job in 
    blurring in people's minds what are very sharp differences in 
    this area.

•       It is only when one comes to consider these differences 
    that one realises the stark truth about the alternative defence 
•   and foreign policies and everything they imply.

        This year defence is even more of a national issue than 
    ever before. It is as important in South-Western Victoria as it 
    has always been in Queensland and Western Australia.

        The words of the Opposition's spokesman on defence, their 
    deputy leader, Mr Barnard, must concern all Australians wherever 
    they live, for it was he who put his party's isolationist defence 
    policy in a nutshell when he said that Australia's own shores 
    were her strategic frontiers.



                          .../2

                         - 2 -




              This demonstrates a fundamental difference between the 
       Government and our opponents.


              We reject the proposition that Australia should withdraw 
       into itself. We cannot afford to do this.


              Whatever we do, our region of the world is changing 
       and will continue to change. We cannot ignore this process and 
       for our own benefit and for the benefit of our neighbours to the 
       north, we must involve ourselves in the affairs of the region 
       and exercise our influence so that the changes there, are to our 
       mutual advantage. Putting it more bluntly, continued security in 
•      South East Asia means continuing security for Australia.


              I would like to illustrate these points with three 
       instances - SEATO, ANZUS, and what we know as the Five-Power 
       Arrangement. SEATO, the South East Asian Treaty Organisation 
       has occupied an important position in the affairs of the South 
       East Asia region since its formation 18 years ago. Naturally, 
       it has undergone and is undergoing changes, but remains a 
       useful institution supported by our allies, the United States, 
       Britain, New Zealand, the Philippines and Thailand, publicly 
       within the last four or five months.
•

s             Yet Mr Whitlam, on 26 June, spoke of SEATO as moribund, 
       and his colleague, Mr Morrison, described it as a totally 
       irrelevant dead horse.


              ANZUS is the only defence treaty link Australia and 
       New Zealand has with the United States, and as such, is a key to 
       our defence policy.


              Yet last year Labor changed its policy to eliminate 
       all reference to ANZUS being of crucial importance in Australia's 
       defence policy. It removed it from the defence section of the 
       policy and included it under foreign affairs.


              Under Labor there will be another aid organisation. 

       As Mr Whitlam said on 20 May: "ANZUS must change or die."

                                                   ,3

               -3




        Australia contributes a great deal in aid to other 
    countries through the many existing aid arrangements, and that 
    aid is increasing.


        But ANZUS is a defence treaty of great importance to 
    Australia. It is the only defence arrangement of its type in 
    which we are involved, and it should remain a defence treaty.


        Finally, I should mention the five-power arrangement 
    Australia has with New Zealand, Britain, Malaysia and Singapore.


•       Labor is committed to ending Australia's participation 
    in the arrangement by recalling all the Australian forces involved. 
    This, of course, would completely wreck the whole agreement. 
    Britain's reduced defence role in South East Asia is an acknowledged 
    fact and no one could expect the British people to sustain such 
    an arrangement without Australian participation.


        New Zealand is too small to exercise an effective presence 
    without Australia. Therefore, we are the linchpin in the 
    arrangement and such a withdrawal as Labor proposes would bring 
    it to an abrupt end.

•
        The very fact that defence is receiving less prominence 
    this year than for some considerable time is a compelling reason 
    for us to give careful thought to the entire issue.


        Without co-operative regional arrangements, without 
    ANZUS, without the Five-Power Arrangement in South East Asia, 
    Australia would be isolated, unable to play an effective role 
    and have an effective influence in the changes in our own region 
    of the world. Under those circumstances our own national security 
    would be put at risk.


         I believe this policy of isolation is so unrealistic 
    that every thinking Australian from Cairns to South Western Victoria 
    must reject it.



                .. .. .. ..

