<!--start metadata-->
Title: The budget - as it affects transport and roads
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 22/09/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                      3AA - 22/9/57
                            ï+~AÌ+COi~ i~`H1~S1:kt y~H~ _yOR V~x~I€3~3 t3YB ~- 25/9/57
                   TR rl: MOLT - AS I'.0 MHO`              SORT :AN) H OA;` t
   w
             In this article I want to deal with those uspecta of the 

         that affect transport and road building policy.
             payment from the petrol tax under Commonwealth Aid                    ds 

legislation will reach £34 million this year or just under £2 llion 

more than last year. The existing Commonwealth ALL Rc ds legislation 

which is, in reality, an agreement between the Commonwealth and the 

States, is due to expire at the end of June, 1959. The Government 

proposes to review the whole question of Con onwaa) ti assistance for 

roads before that date.

             I would like to point out as I have said before that 

Commonwealth is bound by the agreement with the States until that time 

and it has no right whatsoever to break the agreement with the States. 

In the meantime, however, the Government has decided that some further 

special assistance should be provided for roads. To raise funds for 

this assistance, a tax is being imposed upon diesel fuel used by diesel 

road users. This will bring diesel road vehicles into lire: with petrol 

driven vehicles which have, of course, paid the petrol tax for may years.

             rreviouely, operators of diesel powered vehicles have not 

paid their fair share of contribution to road maintenance and this 

applies particularly, of course, to the interstate diesel road hauliers. 

A diesel tax has benimposed upon these pe)ple so that they will make 

their contribution to road use.

             I want to say quite emphatically that primary producers and 

industrial users of diesel fuel will not have to pay the tax although 

I cannot say at this stage how the administration of these classes of 

exemption will be carried out.

             In this year the tax is expected t o yield £R m3.Ilion but 

the Government has decided, under this further special ,assistance, to 

make £3 million available both this year and next year. This special 

assistance is going to be distributed as far as possible on the basis 

of collection. That means that if £750,000 worth of tax is raised from 

Victoria then Victoria will be returned £750,040 worth for road con- 

struction and maintenrt-e. Under this provision Victoria should benefit

more than other States because it is probably true to say that more 
diesel fuel is used in Victoria than in the other States limanksmit 
although quite certainly New South ;iales would be u very close second.
     The fact that the diesel tax money is being distributed in 
this 'ay ia recognition by the Government that the petrol tax tormula 
ie out-dated and needs review. It is also recognition that the source 
of funds for road construction and maintenance needs careful scrutiny 
and the Treasurer emphasised the fact that this special assistance 
ehould be regarded as an interim measure only which will be reviewed 
together with the petrol tax distribution before the end of June, 1959.
     In previous reports on the question of road finance I have 
said that I thought a diesel tax was not the solution to the problems 
of interetate road hauliers for the simple reason that I thought it would 
be very difficult to police, a situation in which we had one class of 
user poying the tax and anther class, mostly the primary producer, 
being exempt. I said that I thought this would lead to groat 
administrative and policing difficulties. The Government has boon 
assured, however, that these difficulties are not insurmountebles 
Nevertheless, I think in this regard we should remember that this ia 
en interim measure for ti years and if the policing and administrative 
difficulties prove greater than the Government believes, then I have no 
doubt that this tax will also come up for revision at the end of 195g.
     The effect of this tax and the effect at increased allocation 
from the petrol tax will mean that just under £5 million or extra 
funds will be available to road building bodies throughout Austrelia 
in this financial year and because the diesel tax is being distributed 
on a different basis, this tate can expect to get a larger proportionate 
share of that increase than she has in previous years.
     While I am on the question of transport I would also like 
to say that the Government has undertaken to join with the tate 
Government In the provision of a standard rail link between Melbourne 
and Wedenge. This will do a very great deal to reduce costs of 
transport between Melbourne and Sydney. It is worth noting that at the 
present time Alburyls biggest industry is the transfey of goods from 
the Victorian broad gauge to the New f3outh Wales standard gauge.

This is all nee    a d useless and wasterdouble handling which

will be avoided bant~.`a:e standard gauge is constructed and when the
rail trucks and passc       sins t an go straight through from

Melbourne to Sydney without ahy transfer.
          ~ha final amount of     stance     beprovided by the
Gorman a.lth l'a4: this work hr wayyet been decided but I understand
discussions are already under maigit betweea the Coaumonweeelth and

the atate Governments ct onB erned.
          ~'hose last two things that l hamentionedare
         a very real step toward in help       e transport s;ystem

throughout Australia.
          Concerning ro+    it is not so much the increased

ass    nee of about £5 rai ion that is significant but the fact

thu   no Gov.srnmen t has recognised that the Commonwealth id Roads 
legi    ion needs review and that this review will take place before 
    present agreement with the Commonwerath and the Mates expires
        rid of 1959.







g0/9/1957

