<!--start metadata-->
Title: Problems confronting the wool industry
Description: press statement
Date: 29/03/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 RESS TAT 'XII                     March 29t959
             In the last week P'-rlinment devoted an afternoon's 
debate to consideration of problems confronting the weol industry, 
eepecially to those concerning marketing.
             All members agreed thot there are problems facing 
the industry which, if poseible, must be overcome. Probably the 
meet important of these ib the oueetion of price stability.
             The Government mointoins it point of view that 
wool belongs to the woolgrowers, that it ie their industry and that 
they should decide for themselves whether they wont ony change 
in the methods of marketing.
             It was also pointed out in the debate that the 
Government would require a considerable weight of evidence that 
the woolgrowers had, as a majority, acme around to support some 
sort of marketing scheme, because you will remember that when this 
queetion came up for diecuesion in 1951, the Government went eo 
far as preparing a plan. It supported that plan before twentyeight 
natione of the world, arguing th%t it would be a fair one for 
the woolbuyere. Then somewhere along the line mony woolgrowers 
got the idea that they did not want any plan or eny Government 
interference and when the vote was taken a four to ohe majority 
rejected.
             I think grower e should appreciate the Governments., 
point of view and even though conditione in come respects have 
changed, growers muet realice thet the Government „toes not want 
to be placed in the same poeition again. If the growers agree 
amonget themselves and support a plan then the Government will be 
very willinr to examine it and to Bee if it can be practically 
applied, but it will want evidence beforehand that growers in 
general are prepared to support such a plan.
             For instance, the previous scheme was to be 
financed by a levy of 71110 for one or two years to build up a 
revolving fund to finance a floor price scheme. On present wool 
prices this levy would :probably have to be in force for throe 
or four years to build up a sufficient fund. 7 comes to £4. 
or £5. a bale on present day prices.

                2 —
         Have the grover' organizations asked their 
members whether they are prepared to finance that kind of 
contribution?
         Alterntively, if they believe the Government 
should find the money then the Government would have same control 
over the industry.
         Furthermore, the orowers should try to epeak to 
th  nent h one voice or inevitablr their case ic weakened.
         There are sound reasons why it would be inopportune
for the Government to act hurriedly on this matter.
         At the moment the industry is melting a comprehensive
examination of different aspects of cool problems,
         The Australian Wool a 1 Meat Producere' Federation
hae put forward a certain plan.
         The Australian Woolgrowere' Council has issued
the Chielett Report which brings some interesting information to
light. The woolgrowers' Council furthermore is sending two people
abrovd to see how serious fluctuations in the price of wool are,in
their effect on the textile and anufacturing industries abroad.
         There is plenty of evidence to the seriousness
of this effect in Australir., but there is apparently came doubt
as to the effect overseas.
         In addition to this the New South wale c Branch
of the Grazier' Association has appointed a special committee to
examine all expecte of wool marketing.
         Also, in the next two or three months the report
will be available on the Goulburn woolbuying activities.
         I think it is only reasonable to expect that
when the information from all these sources is available, the
industries' leaders will examine it and come to its decisione
regarding the future management of the industry.
         Woolgrowers should be perfectly capable of coming
to their own decisions on thee() matters and putting proposals to
the Government. I am sure that if the industry as a whole can put
unified proposals to the Government then they will get the most
serious consideration, but it is difficult for the Government to

            3 —
act if the industry itself is divided on what it wants.
We must remember that the wool industry be;ongs to the growers, 
and therefore any action by the Government which involves the 
future of the industry must have the approval of a majority 
of growers.
   In the course of the examinations which are taking 
place I hope industries, leaders will be examining certain 
aspects of existing stabilization schemes.
   Floor price plans are operating in New Zealand and
South Africa, but in theee countries the floor price has 
been nothing more than the minimum price obtainable and 
the percentage fall in the pric_ of wool in New Zealand 
and South Africa over the last six months has been markedly 
greater than percentage fall in Australia where the free 
auction system operates.
   Furthermore, one of the depressing things on the
market at the present tine is the volume of stocks held 
in New Zealand, South Africa, Uraquay and the Argentine, 
four countries whose governments all interfere in the 
marketing of wool.
   Only in Australia where the free auction works 
has all wool been cleared.
   I hope the Industry will also examine possible 
improvements that could be made in the auction system, to 
see whether or not the greatly desired objective of
stability could not be achieved in this way.
   There are many imperfections in the system. There 
is a period of the year, lasting up to thr e months, when
wool is not sold. Manufacturers and traders have to carry 
large stocks over this period and run the risk of loss if 
the spring sales open up at a lower price. Sales should be 
held in 'every month of the year so that an even supply of 
wool is constantly coming on the market.
   Furthermore, the buyer's right to say he has made 
a mistake and that the lot for which he was the final bidder 
must go up again, should be abolished. If you are buying

               4 MOP
sheep, stock or land, you must stand by your bid. The same 
should be true of wool sales. This would not affect the 
seller's right to refuse any particular bid if he thought 
the price was too low.
          The question of lot transferring should
also be examined to see if ways and means cannot be found
to prevent it. If this could be done, it would make the
operation of pies, to use the technical term, almost impossible.
          I feel strongly, however, that this matter
should be taken carefully. If changes are to be made we must
be very certain that they will improve present conditions.
We should examine not only the question of alternative methods
of selling wool but also whether or not improvements cannot
be made in the present auction system which has served
Australia well in past years.
          The Government Members' Wool Committee
is examining all questions relevant to these problems.

