<!--start metadata-->
Title: Rural reconstruction
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: c1971
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                     I recently had a letter from theminister for 
                               primary industry agreeing about the need for an 
                               examination in de th of the applications and decisions 
                               being made by the States concerning rural reconstruction.

                                     Mr Sinclair has told me that action is already 
                               in train to ebtdn these details.

                                     He said thebureau of agricultrual economics is 
                               now undertaking a ollection of information from 
                               the States, and its expected that the data will 
                               enable a detailed evaluation to be made of the 
                               progressof the program of reconstruction.

                                     As you know I have been pressing for this kind 
                               of review for a considerable period.

                                   A short while ago I g -some tettative figures 
                               of the monies available to and loaned by the different
                              States. Some interesting situations appear. ,  L;

                                   Tizexinimxffiaiiiffimxigxxam
                                   New South Wales has already entered a financier 
                              committment of over 12 million and Victoria of a 
                              little over 3 million dollars. Of the smaller
~                               States both Queensland and Western Australia have 
                              made larger commitments than Victoria of over 
                              five million dollars and four million dollars 
                              respectively.

                                   Thereis a view that the provisions of the scheme 
                              are being more severely judged in Victoria than in 
                              other States. The amount of financie which has 
                              been made available from this State would seem to 
                              confirm this although firm judgements can't be made 
                              until the review about which I have spoken is 
                              completed.

a
•         I am advised that at this st ge the r stri;iio 
        is certainly not the lack of fu ds because considerable 
        uncommitted funds remain ava lable for this financial 
        year.









i











•

