<!--start metadata-->
Title: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Bill
Description: press statement
Date: 29/11/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT                                 November 29th,1959
 MALCOLM FRASER:
                During this last Session a small but important Bill was 
 passed affecting the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
 Organization. In the past this Organization has been controlled by an 
 executive of five members, only three of whom were full time officers of 
 the Department. The Bill increased the numbers of the executive from 
 five to nine; five of whom will be full-time members and five of whom 
 must also be scientists.
                In the last few years the C.S.I.R.O. has had to undertake 
 a great deal of new work. Its budget in the last ten years has increased
 from about £2. to £8 million. The work of the Organization has become 
 more complex, and more important to many branches of Australian industry, 
 particularly to our rural industries. The purpose of increasing the size 
 of the executive is to try and take some of the weight of administration 
 and direction off the shoulders of the Chairman of the Organization who 
 is also, by virtue of his office, Chairman of the Executive. There is 
 no doubt that the early death of Sir Ian Clunies Ross could easily have 
 been hastened by the pressure under which he worked and by the 
 responsibilities which he was determined to take on his own shoulders, 
 The larger Executive may prevent future Chairmen of this Organization 
 being overburdened by their extremely important office.
                For the last ten years the emphasis so far as agricultural 
 science has been concerned has been on research. This has had many 
 beneficial results for primary producers. I don't think it would matter 
 what branch of primary industry we may be in, whether it would be sheep, 
 cattle or dairying, we would be able to point to some discovery of C.S.Q. 
 R.O. which has been of direct benefit to us. However, the fact that we 
 have made important advances in this field does not necessarily mean that 
 the work that remains to be done would diminish; on the contrary, I feel
 that there will always be important and urgent problems confronting our 
 research officers. Indeed, many problems that we once thought were 
 solved confront us again in a different form and research must be begun 
 again from the beginning. The manner in which the blowfly has bred 
immunity to aldrin and dieldrin gives an example of this.

                            ..    2     O
          In addition, the problems of pasture improvement bring with 
them new problems to which we do not necessarily know the answers. I 
know of people in the last two winters who have had very severe problems 
in raising young calves and young cattle successfully. For some reason 
the stock have just not done well while veterinary tests have shown that 
they have been free from worms and the pastures were apparently healthy 
and in good order. Veterinary officers were not able to say why the 
cattle did not do well. This sort of thing presents problems which our 
research officers must try to solve.
           Although the emphasis previously placed on research has had 
good results, it has also had some results which have not been good. 
The C.S.I.R.O. has become the glamour Organization. Its officers are, 
in general, paid higher salaries than officers in State Departments 
of Agriculture. In large measure Departments of Agriculture have, in 
many people's minds, had the appearance of the poor country cousin
This is wrong.  The resultslof research will be lost unless an equal 
emphasis is placed on extension work. What I am saying here is in 
no way a criticism of the officers of various Departments of Agriculture. 
These officers do a magnificent job against extremely heavy odds. There 
are not enough of them and it is not just humanly possible for the 
officers of the Department of Agriculture to cover the areas which are 
assigned to them.
           Indeed, I think there are several problems to which we know 
the scientific answer but for which we have completely inadequate 
facilities if we are going to try and solve these problems. I want 
to quote only one stock disease to make my point.
           -There is a disease in cattle — vibriosis. Its effect is 
to lower calving percentages. It can have a dramatic effect on 
percentages; on the other hand, it can result ih about 10% to 15% loss 
each year, a loss which farmers may put down to natural causes but
which is, in effect, due to vibriosis. Vibriosis is difficult to 
detect and difficult to control, but it can be controlled. I am told 
that over the whole of eastern Australia 80% of herds tested, and 
tested is the important word, have suffered from vibriosis. It may 
well be that a campaign is needed to control this disease in much the

                       _    3    «.
same way that efforts have been made to control contagious abortion. 
              Under present circumstances it is quite impossible 
to institute such a campaign because the manpower just does not
exist.  This is important because in days when returns to
primary producers are not particularly good, an extra 10% or 15% 
in calving each year could mean the difference between profit 
and loss.
              All this is not anyone's fault. I think it has 
been the natural result of the general thinking of the last decade 
which has placed more a phasis on research than on extension.
              Primary producers will be able to achieve maximum 
efficiency only if scientific officers both in the research and 
in the extension fields have the necessary resources. In future 
money and scientific manpower must be divided more equally between 
each, When we realise that research and the application of 
successful research afford primary producers the best means of 
reducing costs then we know how important this is.

