<!--start metadata-->
Title: HMAS "Voyager"
Description: press statement
Date: 27/09/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEIvENT

NiALCOLM FRASER :

                                                September 27th,1964


                       H.M.A.S, "VOYAGER"


              The long and disturbing enquiry into the loss of H.M.A,S. 
"Voyager" has now been completed, the Report has been tabled in Parliament 
and the Prime Minister has made a lengthy statement.

              There is no doubt that this tragic accident dealt a very 
serious blow to the prestige and morale of our Navy, and it will take 
some time to recover. There is also no doubt that this accident and 
enquiry has caused many Australians to have some doubts about the general 
standard and efficiency of the operation of the Navy.

              When the Prime Minister reported to Parliament, he made 
certain specific statements about matters which had been adopted to do as 
much as human people can do to see that this sort of thing does not happen 
again.

              I want to talk, however, about another aspect of this whole
matter.

              The terms of reference of the Royal Commission were as wide
as they could be. It was completely open to the Royal Commissioner to call 
any witnesses that he wished, to see anyone who wished to give evidence and 
to broaden the enquiry into any aspect of Naval affairs. As a result of 
this enquiry the Royal Commissioner found that the chief responsibility of 
the loss of the Destroyer rested with "Voyager" herself. However, he did 
make critical remarks of three of the bridge officers of "Melbourne".

              In the case of Captain Robertson, the Commissioner said that 
when "Voyager" turned to port her action should have created some doubt in 
Captain Robertson's mind as to what her intentions were. He suggested that 
Captain Robertson could have made some enquiry or passed some signal to 
"Voyager". Then,I quote the Commissioner - "Whether action of this kind 
would have avoided the collision I am unable to say, but I feel that the 
chances of a collission occurring might have been lessened if some such 
action as I have indicated had been taken by Captain Robertson."

              In the case of Acting Commander Kelly and Sub-Lieutenant 
Bate, both of whom were on the bridge of "Melbourne", the Commissioner 
said that the watch maintained was "in the circumstances inadequate".

              As a result of these statements there appears in some people's 
minds to have been a wish to pin-point the blame for the tragic disaster on 
a particular person or in some particular matter of procedure. Of course, 
it is never easy to do this and sometimes it is just not possible. There 
have been questions in Parliament which have suggested that there should have 
been a court martial as a result of the Royal Commissioner's findings. The 
motives underlying these suggestions again appear to have been the wish to 
pin-point the blame. It may well be that people feel that if you do place 
the blame directly on one person or another that the matter is solved and 
there is nothing more to worry about. I would think that this is extremely 
doubtful, especially in an accident of the kind that the Navy experienced.

              If there was a court martial as a result of the Royal Commission, 
it would plainly have to be a court martial of somebody mentioned in critical 
terms by the Commissioner. But it must be pointed out that the criticisms by 
the Commissioner were made as a result of evidence given by individuals against 
themselves. There was no evidence from other sources which could form a basis 
of any particular criticism.

                                                              /2.

                                   2



              The rules of Royal Commissions are quite clear. The evidence 
that a person gives in front of a Royal Commission cannot be used to convict
him at some later criminal or court martial proceedings. If somebody is 
going to be prosecuted by court martial, it is necessary to have evidence 
from somebody other than the person who is being prosecuted. The advice 
from Counsel, from the Commonwealth Crown Law Department and from the 
Attorney-General was that there was no evidence against the three officers 
I have mentioned apart from what they themselves had said. It was clear 
that without a case, that without evidence from other witnesses, such people 
could not be put into the dock, prosecuted and convicted out of their own
mouths alone.   Indeed, it would be grossly unfair to attempt to do this.

              This does not mean to say that evidence given before a Royal 
Commission cannot be given again in some criminal or court martial proceedings. 
It can. The only point is that evidence given by a particular person cannot
be used against that particular person in some later proceedings. If John 
Smith gave evidence about somebody else in a Royal Commission and this later 
led to some other proceedings John Smith could, of course, be called to give 
evidence, but he would not be giving evidence against himself and this is 
the difference.

              This is why there is no case and there is no court martial. 
I think it is quite wrong and quite unfair that these personal aspects of the 
tragedy should be prolonged or emphasized. After the initial debate last 
week, there were several questions in the Parliament largely directed to the 
Prime Minister. All seem to have underlying them the thought that a court 
martial should be held. The sooner all this is forgotten and everyone 
concerned concentrates on rebuilding the strength and morale of the Navy 
the better it will be.




                                 -000

