<!--start metadata-->
Title: General organisation, press statements
Description: press statement
Date: 1/02/1959
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATEMENT                                                  Page 1.
       FEBRUARY, 1959.

        It is now some time since I've reported to the men and women of this
 Electorate, but these reports will be made weekly from now on. They will
 continue at least until the end of the present Session. I may stop them 
 again for a short while in the Winter recess, when I will be spending my 
 time in the Electorate, visiting those places I had hoped to get around 
 this Summer.
        Unfortunately, as you probably know, I've been out of action and
 am still not allowed to accept any Electoral engagements. I hope to be 
 at Canberra for the opening of Parliament on February 17th, but even this 
 is not certain.
        I would like to take this opportunity of thanking everyone
 publicly who has sent me messages of goodwill of one kind or another.
 I appreciate them all.   I'm sorry I've had to refuse so many invitations 
 to attend different functions in the last few weeks, but hope people
 realise that it has been outside my control.  I trust that where the
 functions have been of an annual nature that I will be given an opportunity 
 of attending next year.
        It is often said that difficulties never come singly. About the 
 time of the Election, my permanent secretary fell. and cracked a hip bone. 
She managed to find a replacement for me, but she, too, unhappily, had to
be rushed to hospital just after the Xmas holidays.   Apparently she had
been sickening for some time, and affairs in my office were in considerable
disorder.   As a result of this, some people who had written to me did
not get answers as quickly as they should have.  One or two letters that 
had been put away by themselves had, I'm ashamed to say, gone unanswered
for several weeks.   I want to apologise to the people concerned for any
delays or inconvenience that may have been caused through this. It's 
something that I like to avoid at all costs, because acting as a contact 
between members of this Electorate and Government Departments of one 
kind or another is something I regard as one of the most important 
functions of any job as your Member in the House of Representatives.

                                                            Page 2.

            I'm glad to say that many people who would probably have
seen me on my usual tour round the Electorate have written to me at Nareen 
on many different subjects.
            Parliament reassembles on 17th February for what I am sure
will be a busy year. Quite apart from any new things that may occur in
either the local or the international scene, the Prime Minister's policy 
speech foreshadowed a wealth of variety and discussion on many subjects. 
This month there is a controversial conference on road finance to discuss; 
in particular the petrol tax formula which came up for renewal or 
alteration at the end of the financial year.
            In March at the Premiers' Conference, Mr. Boite will be 
bringing the Uniform Tax position to the fore once again.
            In the Federal Parliament, the Banking Bills incorporating 
the great new Development Bank will be reintroduced, and suggested 
constitutional changes will come in for close examination.
            In my weekly reports, I'll be dealing with these subjects, 
together with many others, but for now

                                      Goodbye.

