<!--start metadata-->
Title: Monopolies and restrictive practices, industrial situation
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 11/06/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                                      cz‘Ite) ~~~
                                                                             3HA Sunday, 11 June, 1972. 
              BROADCAST:                                                     3YB Thursday, 15 June, 1972. 
                                                                             3LK Tuesday, 13 June, 1972.



                          Last month the Attorney-General, Senator Greenwood, 
              foreshadowed important changes in the laws affecting monopolies 
              and restrictive trade practices, and I should like to outline 
              one or two provisions that will be contained in the Bill.
                          First, I must say that the Government firmly believes
              in a system of free enterprise under which citizens have as
•             much freedom as possible to participate in the production and
              distribution of the nation's wealth.                           But there are times
              when trade practices, such as monopolies, can work against
              the best interests of the Australian community, and it is in
              this area that the Government is now stepping in.
                          Restrictive trade practices and monopolisation contribute
              to inflation.             A competitive environment keeps business men 
              on their toes, encourages innovation and discourages soft 
              attitudes towards excessive wage demands.
•                         Monopoly situations can lead to high price levels 
              through their affect on the efficiency of the industries 
              concerned or through profit levels that are higher than they 
              otherwise would be.
                          And so these new moves are part of the Government's 
              attack on the basic causes of inflation, and give the lie to 
              those who say the Government's anti-inflationary policies are 
              directed only at the wage earner.
                          Briefly, what the Government intends to do is to
              establish a Monopolies Commission.                         The Government will be 
              able to refer to the Commission situations where monopoly 
              conditions might be operating in a manner which is contrary to
             the public interests.                                                                          .../2

       •
                                          2.

                  For the purpose of the legislation, monopoly conditions 
         will exist if one third of the relevant market is concentrated 
         in the hands of a single business or businesses, which are 
         acting in such a way as to restrict competition.          The Commission 
         will recommend action to remedy any such monopoly situation and 
         the Government will be able, by an order, to render that
         practice or arrangement unlawful.
                  The Monopolies Commission will also be able to inquire
         into company mergers.      In considering whether a merger is 
         likely to operate against the public interest, the Commission 
         will be required to have regard to the likely consequences of 
         any reduction in competition, but it will also have regard
         to benefits expected to flow from the merger.         The Government 
         will have similar power to prohibit a merger from taking place. 
                  The net effect of these and other changes will be 
         both to strengthen the legislation on restrictive trade practices
         and monopolisation, and to widen its scope.          They will do 
         much to preserve and encourage competition and thereby benefit
•        our free enterprise system and our way of life generally.


                  In the last few months the industrial situation in 
         Australia has received a lot of attention, and the Government's 
         recent amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 
         were a stimulus to public discussion on the issue, but despite 
         this I do not believe the seriousness of the position has been 
         fully understood.
                                                                     .../3

                                 3

              I do not think people have grasped the extent to 
      which industrial lawlessness has grown in the last three or 
      four years, thereby having its impact on the nation's economy, 
      but most important on the incomes and lives of the millions 
      of trade union members throughout Australia.
              Some people think that warnings of an intensification, 
      rather than a lessening, of the left wing group of the Labor 
      movement in Australia are just so much political nonsense, 
      but the figures simply do not bear this out.
              Albert Monk, President of the A.C.T.U. from 1948 to 
      1969, was perhaps the greatest moderating influence our trade
      union movement has ever known. Under his guidance, extreme
      industrial unrest was minimised and the A.C.T.U. generally 
      exercised its substantial influence, pursuing legitimate
      industrial interests by its members. But towards the end 
      of Monk's presidency the strength, power and militancy of the 
      left wing began to assert itself, until in the 1969 presidential 
      ballot, Mr. Hawke, the left wing Chairman, was able to capture
•     the position Mr. Monk had held for more than two decades. 
              Looking back over the last ten years or so the trend
      is very clear.  From 1961 to 1968 the number of working days 
      lost through industrial disputes in Australia fluctuated between 
      500,000 and a million.
              In 1969 the number of working days lost was nearly
      2 million, in 1970 nearly 2,400,000 and in 1971 more than
      3 million.


                                                       .../4

                                4.

             Let me translate those lost working days into lost
      earnings of union members. Total wages lost due to the 
      disputes ranged from $4 million to $12 million between 1961
      and 1968.  In 1969 the total leaped to nearly $23 million, 
      in 1970 to nearly $31 million and in 1971 to $45 million.
             By all of this it is perfectly obvious who is paying 
      the price for Mr. Hawke's dominance of the industrial 
      movement - and incidentally he is now Senior Vice President 
      of the Labor Party, the number two position in Australia. 
      Of course it is the average trade union member, who is paying 
      to the tune of $45 million a year.





      For further information:  Collin Myers
                                Canberra Tel. 73 3261
•

