<!--start metadata-->
Title: Import licensing and the composition of imports
Description: press statement
Date: 11/06/1961
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


               PRESS STATEMENT
                                                           June 11th,1961

                           IMPORT LICENSING AND TIE COMPOSITION OF IMPORTS
                     Ever since the Government lifted import licensing 15 or 16
               months ago the Government has been under attack from some sections
               of the community to have import licensing re-imposed. Such people 
               try to say that since licensing has been lifted a flood of consumer
               goods have come into this country, embarrassing our overseas payments
               and causing difficulty to Australian industry. They go on to say 
               that as a result of these difficulties the Australian Government 
               has been forced to pursue unpopular measures and to institute a 
               credit squeeze.
                      This is a one-sided story of what has taken place. It is
               a story that has been put about for the very purpose of achieving 
               re-imposition of import licensing. Manufacturers in Australia 
               quite clearly liked import licensing, because under import 
               licensing they had a guaranteed market in this country irrespective 
               of whether they were producing essential or luxury goods, and 
               almost irrespective of the prices they charged. It is quite clear 
               that many manufacturers put up prices more than they need have 
               because of the dual protection that import licensing gave them.
                It is worth noting that the traditional Australian protective
               method is through the tarriff, and we have efficient and traditional 
               machinery for protecting Australian industries through the tariff. 
               There are also emergency procedures, instituted last year, which 
               would enable an industry to get a quick Tariff hearing if it was 
               suffering harm as a result of dumping or as a result of undue imports.
                        Import licensing has never been designed to protect
               industry - it was designed to protect our Balance of Payments.
               The Campaign of the last 12 or 14 months has been designed to bring 
               import licensing back as a protective method for Australian industry, 
               and this the Government is determined not to do.
                        However, this is all general. If you examine what has
               happened to the increased imports since import licensing was
               lifted you find little or no substance for the case that Australian 
               industries are being harmed by a flood of consumer goods which are 
               displacing the products of Australian industry.
                        Imports in 1960 rose in value by £231M above the level
               of 1959. This was a heavy increase. When we look at the 
               composition of this increase we find that 64/ was producers' 
               materials - that is materials used by Australian industry in 
               the course of manufacture - 14.3% represented capital equipment - 
               again equipment used by industry - about 5% or 6% represented 
               other miscellaneous items which were again essential to production 
               or to munition or war stores. Thus, over 82% of the increase 
               in imports represents producers' materials, capital equipment or 
               what is called in technical jargon "auxiliary aids to production".
                        The flood of consumer goods, to use the term that has 
               become current, amounted to 17.5% of the increase in imports. 
               This is relatively small proportion of the increase.
 
                                            2 -
                      If we look at the break-up a little further we find that 
              food, drink and tobacco increased by £6M, from £33M to £39M between 
              1959 and 1960. In absolute terms the increase in imports of all 
              consumer goods was £41M out of a total increase of over £231M.
                      The significant part of the break-up concerns producers'
              materials and capital equipment. In absolute terms the increase 
              in producers' materials was £153M. or two-thirds of the total increase
              in imports.  Of this £153M. imports of iron and steel and of 
              materials for the motor vehicle industry each accounted for about 
              £30M, making £60M in all. Imports of capital equipment increased 
              by 17% between the two years. But if imports of aircraft, which 
              were abnormally high in 1959 due to the purchase of Boeings and 
              Lockeed Electras, were excluded the increase in capital equipment 
              is 27%.
                      So far from competing with Australian industry these are
              materials that are used by Australian industry to produce finished 
              consumer goods in this country. It is difficult to see then how 
              the claim that almost the whole of the imports or the increase in 
~             imports are consumer goods can be justified. In fact, what has 
              happened is that while manufacturers have been campaigning most 
              strongly for the re-imposition of import licensing they have, at 
              the same time, been importing up to the bring of their available 
              finance. They have done this on the assumption that if import 
              licensing were re-imposed the present year would be taken as a base 
              year and they wanted to make quite sure that they had a large import
              over this particular period. This, of course, has meant that 
              stocks have risen very much over the past twelve months. The 
              sooner manufacturers are importers realize that the Government 
              is determined to maintain its present position in regard to import 
              licensing the sooner will the imports start to reduce drastically 
              because they will realize that import licensing is not going to 
•             be re-imposed and that therefore there is no need to try and import 
              heavily over current needs at the present time.
                    There is one final point. People have said to me why not
              re-impose import licensing and relax the credit squeeze. 
              Unfortunately, it would not work like this. The main reason for 
              the credit squeeze is inflation. If imports were reduced the 
              volume of money would be the same but it would be chasing a smaller 
              volume of goods. Therefore, to prevent inflation, under circumstances 
              in which licensing was re-imposed, credit restrictions would have 
              had to be more severe than they have been.
                    I don't think any of us would like that.
                     Although I have said in this article that the campaign to
              have import licensing re-imposed is inspired largely by manufacturing 
              industries that wish to have the dual protection of licensing in 
              addition to tarriff, and although I have therefore inferred that 
              most of Australian industry does not need this dual protection 
              I would not want any one to imply from my remarks that some
              industries have not been to some extent harmed. la here industries 
              can demonstrate harm the Government has instituted

                                                3
              emergency procedures which make it possible for emergency tariffs 
              to be instituted in a very short space of time, and these emergency 
              tariffs hold the position until a full Tariff Board hearing can be
              held.   The Government initiated these emergency procedures to 
              cover the very position that would arise once import licensing has
              been lifted.   It recognised the traditional tariff procedure 
              would be too slow in some instances and that some quick method of
              protection could become necessary.    Many industries, such as the 
              woollen piece goods industry, have taken advantage of this emergency 
              Procedure and others are in the course of doing so.








~












•

