<!--start metadata-->
Title: The tariff and the farmer
Description: press statement
Date: 13/04/1962
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  PRESS STATEMENT 

  1\ALCOLM FRASER:


                                                    April l3th,1962


                      THE TARIFF AND THE FARMER


                 Recently, the Government passed legislation to extend the 
  emergency procedures that both primary and secondary industries can use 
  to obtain quick protection in the face of overseas competition.

                 The legislation creates a special authority appointed by 
  the Minister who will work Very loosely within the framework of the
  Tariff Board and who, in the first instance, will be empowered to recommend 
  the emergency tariffs to protect an industry, or if tariffs are ineffective, 
  in his opinion, he would be empowered to recommend quantitative restrictions 
  to protect a certain industry.

                The legislation was supported by the Opposition. The Bill 
 was designed to be a temporary one and the Prime Minister himself made it 
  clear that it was the intention of the Government to weave quantitative 
  restrictions into the general framework of the Tariff Board at a later stage. 
  It is this aspect of the legislation that has given Bert Kelly from South 
 Australia and myself cause for considerable disquiet.

                First, may I say that I am in favour of protection and, if
 necessary, high protection.  There are many advantages that come from it.
 Industries can be established, Our economy can be diversified. Employment 
 can, at times, be improved. These are some of the advantages that can come 
 from wise tariff policy. Because it is most important that tariffs should 
 always be imposed only after what is almost a traditional inquiry and without 
 political interference, we have, over a period of time, developed our Tariff 
 Board procedures and principles. The Board has established a high
 reputation in Australia and overseas. The present Chairman of the Board, 
 Sir Leslie Melville, has done much to improve this reputation in the last 
 two years, following the difficult period which was inevitable after the 
 full relaxation of General import licensing.

                Up to the present, the Board has not had power to use 
 quantitative restriction although the Minister has always been able to 
 use these, if necessary, to protect our balance of payments to protect 
 certain industries,

                The legislation just passed gives an aura of respectability 
 to quantitative restriction which they had not previously held. I am not 
 going to go into the economic reasons why I dislike quantitative restrictions 
 because they would take much longer than anyone would be prepared to listen, 
 but may I say that the effect of quantitative restrictions is to increase 
 costs more than tariffs, to promote a tendency towards monopoly in the 
 industries that are protected by them and to lead to monopoly profit which 
will generally be won by the strongest group in any particular industry. 
 In addition to these, quantitative restrictions are likely to lead to an 
adverse movement in the prices we have to pay for imports, and finally, 
they provoke retaliation from other countries in a way that tariffs do not.

               These are just some of the results of quantitative
restrictions.  It is for these reasons that Bert Kelly and myself tried 
to mount opposition to the Bill but such opposition could, of course, be 
only academic, because the Opposition in Parliament-,= the Australian 
Labour Party — had pledged themselves to support it. Indeed, they had 
pledged themselves to use quantitative restrictions over the whole field 
of Australian imports which would mean going much further along this 
particular road than the Government has any intention of doing.

               It has been said that the primary industries should welcome 
this measure because primary industries can be vulnerable to outside

                                                                /2s

                                -  2 d

 competition just as easily as secondary industries and, therefore, primary 
 industries should like quantitative restrictions. There is some truth 
 in this but, in reality, this defence of quantitative restrictions, which
 is really only another name for import licensing, in a limited field, 
 begs the question.


                 To explain this I would draw primary industries into two 
 groups - those industries like peanuts, tobacco, cotton, which are in their 
 infancy in Australia and which do not supply the whole Australian market 
 on the one hand - and on the other we have the major Australian industries, 
 wool, wheat, meat, sugar and the dairy industry. The first group would 
 be in very much the same position as secondary industries. It does not 
 supply the whole Australian market and it cannot export; If such an
 industry needs protection, it can get a tariff. Both the emergency and 
 full Tariff Board procedures have been open to such industries and they
 have been used by such industries more than once,  No one has yet 
 demonstrated that a tariff has been an ineffective method of protection and 
 its great advantage is that it does preserve some element of competition 
 where quantitative restrictions nearly always destroy competition, 
 consequently causing some degree of monopoly in the industry.


                The Government believes that quantitative restrictions will 
 be used in such a narrow field and on such a limited number of occasions
 that the tendency to monopoly would be very small and controllable especially
 when restrictive practice legislation is passed,  I doubt this, because I 
 think that import restrictions or quantitative restrictions are something 
 that once admitted, even in the narrowest sense, will slowly spread through
 the whole body of our protective arrangements.  However, I was speaking 
 about the two groups of industries and I come now to the major group of 
 industries - the exporting industries. It is worth noting the organisation 
of these. We can leave wool aside because there is no competitor with 
Australia for wool in the sense that no other country would try to sell 
raw wool to us. However, the position could be different with wheat, meat, 
sugar or butter, and some people have tried to say that this recognition 
of quantitative restrictions will be of benefit to such industries because
they are as vulnerable as secondary industries I think the analogy is 
quite false.


                The sugar, wheat and dairy industries sell their products 
on the home market under rigid price controls agreed upon throughout the
industry, thus there could be no monopoly profit for the people in these
industries.    In addition, these industries supply large surplus quantities 
for export which are often sold at lower prices and thus the industries are
not immune from outside competition.    Indeed, they often feel the cold
draught of this overseas competition.    Therefore, the straight out embargo 
that any and every Australian Government has always imposed on any other
country that may want to export butter or wheat or meat to Australia has 
justification.


               If we take the meat .industry we would find that there is 
also an embargo on any imports of meat into Australia, except in certain
items of canned meats, and even though the meat industry does not operate 
under price control in this country it is quite clear that the prices we 
get for our beef and our lamb are set by world-wide competition because we 
have a surplus of beef and a surplus of lamb for export and it is the
competition in the export market that ultimately sets the price inside 
Australia.


               Considering these factors we find that all the major 
export primary industries are subject to very severe competition and some 
of them to price control in Australia. There is, therefore, a constant
pressure to reduce costs.   Now, on these grounds, the administrative 
arrangements that have been made to keep out imported butter, imported 
lamb or imported wheat, have full justification and no Government would ever
think of relaxing such provisions. To say, therefore, that these industries 
need the protection of this new legislation is nonsense. There is no
comparison between them and that Australian secondary industry that supplies
a part of the Australian market and which, if protected by quantitative
                                                                       /3.

restrictions will, in many instances, enjoy relatively no competition and 
thus will have no pressure upon it to keep its costs down,

               It should be remembered that it is easy to impose a 
quantitative restriction but much harder, on political grounds alone, to
remove one.     Those of us who do not like quantitative restrictions
have the consolation that this is temporary legislation,  We have the 
consolation also that the Government has said that they will be used only 
in the narrowest of circumstances and only occasionally. However, there 
is the real fear that once used they will spread and grow throughout all 
our protective arrangements and this is what we must watch very closely.

               The great primary producing organisations would, I believe, 
do a real service to this country if they could bring their weight to bear 
to persuade the Government that there should be no permanent quantitative 
restriction machinery until after a full Tariff Board inquiry has been held
into the general procedures and principles of that Board, If this were done,
we would know more clearly where we were going.  We would know more clearly 
the economic consequences of what we were intending to do.

