<!--start metadata-->
Title: Wool Marketing Corporation, conscription
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 16/07/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                  3HA Sunday 16 July 1972 
     BROADCAST    3YB Thursday 20 1972
                  3LK Tuesday 18 July 1972


         On Tuesday 29 June, the Prime Minister announced 

     that the Government had agreed to the creation of a single 

     wool marketing commission to be known as the Australia 

     Wool Marketing Corporation. The Government also laid 

     down broad guidelines with which the Corporation should 

     conform when it made any submission to the Government 

     relating to acquisition of the wool clip. That decision 

     is already a milestone in the history of the wool industry 

     and a victory for the forces of wool marketing reform.

~

         It took the Government only three weeks to act 

     on that cabinet decision. On July 11 the Minister for 

     Primary Industry Mr Sinclair was able to announce the 

     membership structure of the new Corporation. The membership 

     will be generally in line with the Australian Wool Industry 

     Conference as a quick glance at the industry's proposals 

     and Mr Sinclair's announcement will clearly show. The 

     members of the corporation will be:


         an independent chairman appointed by 

         the Minister for Primary Industry


         four wool grower representatives appointed 

         by the Minister after nomination by the 

         Australian Wool Industry Conference


         three members with special qualifications 

         appointed by the Minister after consultation 

         with the A.W.I.C.


         one government representative whom the 

         Minister will appoint.



                        ./2.

                         - 2 -

               The nine-member corporation therefore does not vary 
         significantly from that recommended by the wool industry. 
         The A.W.I.C. proposed a board of nine members including 
         four wool growers, plus two executive directors with no 
         voting rights.
               The structure of the Corporation's management is 
         designed to operate on an effective commercial basis. This 
         is in line with the guidelines mentioned in the Cabinet 
         Decision which amounted to a condition that the Corporation 
•        should make any recommendation for acquisition on a 
         commercial basis. I am confident that the Corporation, 
         as soon as it is formed, will turn its attention to 
         considering marketing reforms and that they will put 
         proposals to the Government concerning acquisition. The 
         Government has of course decided that the question of subsidy 
         or other financial support would be dealt with separately 
         from the method of marketing.
               A good deal of comment has been made about the 
•        Randall report on the wool industry, a report prepared for 
         the Government by a committee chaired by Sir Richard Randall, 
         former secretary of the Treasury. It is interesting to note 
         therefore, that Mr. Sinclair when announcing the structure 
         of the Corporation, also took the opportunity to say that 
         the Randall report would be made public as soon as it could 
         be published. I hope now that it will soon be available 
         for anyone who wants to read it.





                                       ../3.

               _3

          The speed with which the Government has acted 
      on the initial Cabinet Decision demonstrates a genuine 
      concern for wool reform. I feel we can look forward 
      confidently to the appointment of the members of the Board 
      and for changes which we know are so needed in the wool 
      industry.


•








•

•                             -4


                     My colleague, the Minister for Labour and 
             National Service, My Lynch, recently produced some 
             interesting figures.


                     He said that only 65 men had without reasonable 
             cause failed to report for national service for the 12 
             months to June 30. This represents less than one per 
             cent of the men called up.


 •                   He also made the interesting observation that 
             despite all the efforts of all those opposed to national 
             service, men did not normally continue in their default
             when brought to account.  . Of 45 cases involving
             failure to report which had been finalised in the past 
             12 months, only seven had persisted in their refusal to 
             comply.


                     Of the rest, 19 had agreed to enlist and had done 
            so, 11 had been granted recognition as conscientious 
 •          objectors by a court, and eight had been found not to meet 
            the required medical standards.


                     On June 30 there had been 101 cases which had 
            not been finalised, in which men had failed to report 
            for service. In 32 cases prosecution proceedings 
            had been initiated and in 18 of those, including that of 
            Victorian ALP candidate Barry Johnston, warrants had been 
            issued for the arrest of the men concerned.


                     I refer to these figures only to demonstrate 

            one point. I believe that the Government's policy

                                                 ../2.

.
                          - 5 -

           National Service is correct. In these times of changing 
           international alignments and the effect they have on 
           our own region of the world, National Service is necessary 
           to maintain the military strength Australia requires. 
           But more than this, I believe that the great bulk of 
           Australian people, including its young men accept the 
           rule of law for what it is, the mainstay of our democratic 
           system. This is at least an encouraging sign at a time 
 e         when we should all be concerned at the attempts within 
           our community to change laws by breaking them rather 
           than attempting to change them through the long standing 
           democratic avenues available to us.

