<!--start metadata-->
Title: Portland wool store
Description: press statement
Date: 22/05/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


 PRESS STATIIMB7T:        May 22nd,1960
 +NALCOLM FRASZR
             PORTLAIVD WOOL STURE
      In recent days the position of the Portland Wool Store has 
 come into question. Since this store will be of vital importance to the 
future development of Portland I thought it may be interesting to set 
out the full story as it is up to the present.
      You will know that the store was originally built in the
latter days of the war when wool was still sold under appraisement 
schemes. It was in fact built as an appraisement centre. The store 
took many years to complete and has, in fact, never been used for its 
original purpose.
      By the time it was completed wool was once more being sold
by auction.
      For several years the Department of Supply had a use for the 
building as a bulk store for cotton and other commodities of this kind. 
However, about two years ago, the Department of Supply found that it had 
no further use for the Portland Wool /Store.
      This decision immediately threw open the whole question of
the future of the store. So long as it was used by the Department of 
Supply people had felt that when wool sales were ultimately held in 
Portland that the store would be made available. That would indeed have 
been the position because the Commonwealth is anxious to do what it can 
to assist the development of this important area.
       However, when the Department of Supply gave up the store 
there was a fear that the store might be pulled down or alienated in 
such a way that wool sales could never be held in it. The Commonwealth 
did not want to hold the store idle and empty for an indefinite period 
because, under such circumstances, the store would deteriorate and fall 
into disrepair.
       A little over twelve months ago a decision was originally
made by the Department of Interior to sell or to lease the store. I 
immediately approached the Minister for the Interior regarding this 
building. He fully appreciates the importance of the store and was 
determined to do what he could within the limit of his responsibilities 
to see that the store was used in the best interests of Portland's 
development.

~
  For this reason any intention to call tenders for the building was post- 
  poned for twelve months, that is, up to the present time. This breathing 
  space was made so that people interested in Portland's development 
  would have an opportunity to look around and try and find an
  organization that would be able to use the store for its original purpose.
      Many people have been active in doing this. The Department 
  has now reached a stage in which I think three separate people have 
  shown an active interest in the store. The Department can't judge one 
  between the other end, indeed, when disposing of public property it is 
  a general rule that everyone muet be given an opportunity to purchase 
  the building and, therefore, the building will be going to tender. 
  However, last week I soue t an assurance from the Linioter that when the
  tenders are considered the Department willive ,prefer nce to any 
  tenderer who wishes to use the store for its original purposes that 
  is for wool sales. The Minister has said that he will do this. 
      I believe that disposal or lease of the store to a person or an 
  organization that wants to hold its sales in Portland will certainly be 
  in the best interests of Portland, The Commonwealth, as such, has no 
  authority to conduct sales and, therefore, some arrangement of this 
  kind would have to be made before sales could be held.
      Recently I spoke with the Manager of the Goulburn Wool export 
  Co-operative Company. This Company, as you know, is responsible for 
  breaking the woolbuyers boycott on Goulburn sales. It is a Company 
  owned and controlled by growers of wool. It has since extended its 
  operations to many selling centres throughout Australia, and the 
  Manager was able to convince me that this Company had more than once 
  prevented rings or pies keeping wool prices at artificially low levels.
      I asked the Manager of Goulburn Wool import how many bales he 
  thought would be needed before sales could be held at Portland. He 
  said he thought sales could be held with relatively few bales so long 
  as the organisers were sure that there was one operator in the market, 
  such as Goulburn Wool Export, to prevent buyer organizations destroying 
  the sales.

