<!--start metadata-->
Title: Elections in South Vietnam
Description: radio talks
Date: 8/09/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                                                   •zo-.    $' g ( 6 —~

                                                                     8 September 1967




                             ELECTIONS IN SOUTH VIET NAM

                      Statement by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser


                Malcolm Fraser, Federal Member for Warn on, stated recently 
 that during this year he has met many people who thought that the effort 
 to establish representative Government in South Vietnam before greater 
 security had been achieved was a vain waste of time, So far these
 doubters have been proved wrong, he said, and all the indications so far 
 received point to the fact that the Presidential and Senate elections have 
 been held as fairly and properly as could reasonably be expected under the 
 circumstances. Reports from Australian correspondents such as Dennis Warner, 
 John Bennetts of The Age, and Garry Barker of the Melbourne Herald all 
 supported this view.

                It is worth remembering in talking of elections in South Vietnam, 
 that the United Kingdom, faced with the threat of invasion, suspended 
 democracy during the last world war by the agreement of all political 
 parties. There was not going to be another election till the War was over. 
 In contrast, the South Vietnamese, fighting desperately within their own 
 borders, are attempting to introduce and make effective the normal institutions 
 of a peace—time democracy.

              • He then went on to say that despite all this, last year the South 
 Vietnamese Government undertook to organise five nationwide elections of 
 vital importance in the span of one year.

                1. Elections for the Constituent Assembly, which was established 
 to draw up a constitution, were held in September 1966 and 80% of the enrolled 
 electorate voted — 4,274,000 voted out of 5,288,000.
                2, Local Government elections were held in May 1967, in nearly 
 5,500 villages and hamlets throughout South Vietnam. At this time, out of 
 a total of 6 million electors, 4.8 million voted to elect 14,000 officials 
 from 25,000 candidates. This was despite Viet Gong threats and acts of 
 terrorism during the elections. Further local elections are planned in 
 an additional 275 villages and 1,500 hamlets by the end of this year.
                3. & 4. In the most recent elections for President and Senate 
 once again more than 80% of the registered voters went to the polls - 
 4,860,000 out of 5,850,000. They voted for 10 civilian Presidential and 
 one military candidate and for 480 senatorial candidates.
                This record only serves to indicate the determination of the 
 people of South Vietnam to take advantage of the opportunity that is being
given to them to elect freely their own.r.epresentatives. In all the elections

                2.


held so far more than four fifths of the people have gone to the polling 
booths, despite the very real threats of the Viet Cong to all those who 
did not boycott the elections. When one looks at the increases in casualty 
figures of civilians killed and wounded at election time, one realises the 
force of this determination. In the days immediately preceding the elections, 
it is reported that terrorists killed 200 civilians and wounded 1200 more. 
There were 28 killed on polling day alone and in all, there were 73 incidents 
of Viet Cong mortar ,and grenade attacks on villages on that day.
     5. Elections for the Lower House will be held next month. It will 
therefore be seen that the Government kept its promise — four of the five 
elections have now been held and the fifth is scheduled for late October. 
This is surely a remarkable and praiseworthy achievement in the face of 
tremendous difficulties.

