<!--start metadata-->
Title: Budget
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 26/08/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  RADIO BROADCAST
                                    Sunday, 26th August     3HA
                                    Wednesday, 29th August 3LK
  THE HON. MALCOLlt'! FRASER s M. P.Thursday, 30th August   3YB



  The first budget of the Australian Labor Party was a black 
  budget for everyone who lives in rural communities. Before 
  the last election, a number of promises had been made and I 
  think that we would remember them. They have all been put 
  asides Actions that the Government has taken throughout the 
  course of this year have been hostile to the interests of the 
  rural oomminity, but there are many people who hope that the 
  Government would recognise that a proper balance needs to be 
  maintained within the Australian community, and that therefore 
  policies would evolve that would assist people who live outside 
  the great cities.-

  Having listened to the budget, we know that that won't happen. 
  Let's look at the decisions that were announced in the budget. 
  There is an extra 5u' per gallon on petrol for everyone.
  This is a highly inflationary measure because it will be
  added on to transport costs. It hits all people who live in 
  the country much more than those who live in the cities who 
  have available to them either public transport or who only 
  have to travel short distances.

;a In addition, another 20 a gallon will be added on in many
  country areas because of the change in the equalisation scheme, 
  which, under the previous Government, kept the price in the 
  country within 30 of city prices.

 —Telephone charges and rentals have been increased. All rent•.ls 
  are going to be at the maximum rate and that will be a, rise of 
  100%o for most country people. This is quite unjust, especially 
  in view of the fact that in the cities subscribers have local 
  call access to millions whilst those in country areas have 
  local call access to some hundreds. The Government has
  abolished the provision in which the Department was progressively
  going to take over at Departmental expense the construction of
  lines of all subscribers within fifteen miles of an exchange. 
  They have reduced that provision to within five miles of an
  exchange. The previous arrangement which we irltroduoed some 
  years ago was don: to give some degree of equality to people 
  in remote areas. Tho Government h:s taken this move without 
  any sensitivity or understanding of the problems of people 
  who live often large distances from the towns and cities.

  Country newspapers will be very hard hit. They depend en 
  postage, unlike city newspapers which can be hand—delivered. 
  T believe many will find it difficult to continue in business. 
  With Doug Anthony, I pressed the Postmaster—General to reverse 
  the decision in the course of this last week. He refused and 
  revealed his plain hostility to rural. interests.



                                                .../2

                2



  One significant feature of the budget was the omission of 
  any reference of assistance for local government in country 
  areas. Before the election and during the first session of 
  Parliament, the Labor Party indicated concern for the
  financial difficulties of local government. There is no 
  financial provision made for it in this budget and there was 
  not even a mention of Portland as a study centre for 
  decentralisation proposals in a subsequent statement made by 
  the Minister for Urban and Regional Development.

  These things might have been bad enough, but when we look at 
  the changed depreciation allowances, we find that farmers 
  have been tragically hit. The investment allowance on plant 
  and equipment has been abolished. The depreciation allowance 
  on plant and equipment has been seriously cut. These allowances 
  were first introduced to encourage efficiency in Australian 
  farming and they have been very effective in achieving that. We 
  had a system under which buildings, other than the domestic house, 
  could be written off over a five—year period. Under the new 
  arrangements, the depreciation allowance for buildings will be 
  2% or 3% a year — an almost useless provision.

  Under the Liberal Government, internal subdivisional fences 
  could be written off in the year of expenditure, as could vermin
 r proof netting both internal and external to the property, and 
  boundary fences could be written off over five years. Now they 
  can only be written off at 3% or 4% a year — again a useless 
  provision. The construction of dams, the provision of water 
  supply for stock, could be written off in the year in which 
  expenditure was undertaken because we recognised that Australia 
  was a dry continent and stock were often lost because of shortage 
  of water, and the farming community needed encouragement to make 
  better provision for water conservation. That provision has been 
  abolished. I tried to find out from Treasury what would be the
. new provision for dams and earth tanks. Advice from one quarter
  was 'nil'; advice from another quarter was they 'didn't know'; 
  and advice from another quarter was that 'it might be 10%'. If 
  the Treasury doesn't, know, it shows how little consideration 
  has been given to the consequences of the Government's decision.

  We had the provision in which haysheds and silo could be 
  written off in the year of expenditure. We did this because 
  fodder conservation on farms needed encouragement, especially 
  is this important in drought—prone areas. That provision has 
  been abolished and replaced with a minimal depreciation rate. 
  When farmers look at these things in detail, when they come to 
  make judgements concerning the future improvement of their 
  property, they are going to find that the additional cost will

                 -3



   be very great indeed. This is particularly unfortunate since 
   incomes are now better and for the first time in a long while, 
   many farmers are in a position in which they would have 
   available some funds for farm development and improvement. 
   have estimated the total cost that will be put upon the
   farming community. When you take the changed depreciation 
   allowances, increased petrol taxes, increased telephone
   charges and the abolition of the dairy subsidy, you will find.
  '! that the increased cost to farmers is about $200 million a year,

   I thought it important to catalogue these changes. It is going 
   to take some people some time to work out how much their own 
   individual positions are being directly affected by this budget 
   and the closer they go into it the more unhappy people will 
   become.

   These are the measures that affect individuals and communities. 
   There are still the major matters in the budget which affect 
   life in the city and inflation, and I will speak on those topics 
   in later talks.















•

