<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 10/06/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                           73110





         RADIO BROADCAST                  Sunday, 10th June,  3HA
                                          Wednesday, 13th June 3LK
         THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M. P.   Thursday, 14th June 3YB







         In a few days time I an going overseas to South East Asia, on to 
         London and back to Australia via Canada. It is not a Parlia- 
         mentary tour, it is privately organised. In South East Asia I 
         will be visiting Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Bangkok and 
         Thailand. What I want to do is to get an up to date assess- 
         ment of the way in which these countries view present Australian 
         policies and the way in which these countries view the changing 
         world scene. I think it is terribly important for Opposition 
         members in particular to keep up to date with the way in which 
         South East Asian countries view Australia and the wider field.


•        I wanted to do this because I have a large number of contacts 
         in all of these countries and I think they ought to be maintained. 
         In London I will be having a look at the new social and economic 
         policies which have been introduced by the present Conservative 
         Government. In canada, in particular, I want to look at the 
         problems which they've had between their States and the Dominion 
         Government - the equivalent of our Commonwealth Government - and 
         I want to look at the way in which they've overcome those par- 
         ticular problems.


         The Senate in this last Session has been acting as a proper House 
         of Review. The Electoral Bill which would have made seats in the 
         outskirts of Melbourne smaller than Wannon, the Wimmera or the 
         IvTallee, has been rejected. The Conciliation and Arbitration Bill 
         which would have really ended the Arbitration Court as we have 
         known it through many years of Australian history, and intro- 
         duced collective bargaining on a much wider scale, was also re- 
         jected by the Senate. I believe that this is responsible because 
         the Government proposals would have done a great deal to support 
•        the large and strong unions and we need to remember that the 
         Conciliation and Arbitration process which has been built up 
         through many years in Australia, was designed specifically to 
         protect the small Union with a few number of members and also 
         the small employer who cannot withstand the industrial might 
         of the great and large unions like the Amalgamated Metal
         Workers Union. So that Bill was also rejected.


         Other Bills have been delayed. The Commonwealth Employees' 
         Compensation Bill was delayed because it appeared to the Senate 
         that it gave much better compensation measures than the Bill 
         that they had introduced about the same time to look after the 
         members of the Armed Forces, which was called the Defence Forces 
         Retirement Benefits Act, and it seemed to us that these two 
         measures were completely out of phase with each other, and the 
         normal Commonwealth Public Servants were being given a much 
         better deal than members of the Defence Forces - and that did 
         not seem to make sense.


         The Submerged Lands Bill which has been in and out of the 
         Parliament for a number of years has also been delayed and the 
         Senate called upon the States and the Commonwealth to discuss

                                   —2— 


         these particular matters to see if they couldn't come to an 
         agreement, rather than throwing the matter into a Court for 
         some kind of decision. This is, you will remember, a Bill 
         in which the Commonwealth claims extra territorial rights 
         beyond the Australian coastline. These are rights which the 
         States have traditionally regarded as theirs. It is our view 
         that these sorts of problems ought to be discussed between the 
         Commonwealth and the States and that the Commonwealth should 
         not arbitrarily and capriciously take a view without consulta- 
         tion, and this, of course, is one of the matters about which the 
         Premier of Victoria is in London at the present time, not just 
         by himself but with every other State Premier, protesting about 
         the kind of action which the present Commonwealth Government 
         is taking without consultation with the States.

         Other Bills which the Government introduced have taken very 
•        significant additional powers to the Commonwealth. The
         Airlines Bill which was amended under pressure from the 
         Opposition, the Pipelines Authority Bill which could make a 
         monopoly buyer and seller of natural gas found in Australia, 
         the Grants Commission Bill, about which I will be writing to 
         all local Councils in this electorate, are all Bills which 
         take substantial additional powers to the Commonwealth. The 
         Grants Commission Bill, in particular, was one which ought to 
         have been discussed with the States, and the States have been 
         ignored in its process.

         I was pleased to see that the Senate, using its numbers, has 
         replaced its Oath of Allegiance to the Queen in the Naturalisa- 
         tion Ceremony and we need to remember that the Queen in this 
         sense is not Queen of England but Queen of Australia, and why 
         the Government wants to remove the Queen from the Oath of 
         Allegiance I fail to understand.

         In the dying days of the Parliament the Government sought to 
•        introduce the Bill which would have provided four additional 
         Senators into the Commonwealth Parliament, two for the Northern
         Territory and two for the Australian Capital Territory. It 
         needs to be remembered that the Senate is basically a State 
         House and if we were going to have four additional Senators 
         from Commonwealth administered territories, the fine balance 
         of the Senate could be upset and you could well find that the 
         four Senators from Commonwealth Territories would hold the 
         balance of power quite permanently in the Senate and that 
         would mean that the Senate could no longer act as a States 
         House and protect the rights of the States. I think it is 
         becoming increasingly clear that if the Commonwealth seeks 
         more and more power at the expense of the State, that the 
         role of the Senate will revert to its original intention to 
         protect the continued existence of the States at the expense 
         of State governments.

         It is well known that the Government was not able to introduce 
         a new Wheat Stabilisation programme but they have extended our 
         programme for one further year, giving them more time to think 
         about the sorts of changes that the Government would want to 
         introduce. I said at the time that I thought that that in— 



                                                                ..3/

                -3-




     dicated that there would be a double dissolution, or at least 
     the House of Representatives coming out with the Senate later 
     this year because I believe that the sorts of changes that the 
     Government would want to introduce into the wheat scheme
     especially after Senator Wreidt's speech in Paris, would be 
     one that they would not want to introduce in the days before 
     the Election. But now I see from the reliable Primary Industry 
     Newsletter, printed weekly by Ronald Anderson, that there is a 
     thought running through the dairy industry that the subsidy 
     element for butter and cheese in the future years of the dairy 
     industry stabilisation scheme might well be abolished and, as 
     Ronald Anderson writes, "A chill wind has blown through Australia's 
     dairying corridors of power. Industry leaders have just made 
     a shock discovery that the industry has no guarantee of any 
     butter and cheese subsidy at all for 1973-74". Well, of course, 
i    this subsidy has been built into the pricing structures, the 
     economic structure, of this industry since the days of the 
     last World War. I can hardly believe that the Government would 
     abolish it at one stroke, but we know very well that Frank Crean, 
     the Treasurer, is struggling to find the money to pay for many 
     promises which have been made which largely affect the great 
     cities, and where they find those funds from is going to be 
     interesting to see indeed.


     I will be away for 3 or 4 weeks. I think it will be a useful 
     trip. I will be reporting upon it when I return. I am not 
     protesting that every moment of the trip is going to be 
     business. I hope it will be possible to get an odd fish and 
     I will be staying some days with a sister of mine who has 
     lived in Rome for a large number of years.






•

