<!--start metadata-->
Title: The ANZAC commemorative medallion and lapel badge
Description: press statements sent to electorate newspapers
Date: 23/03/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


i

      PRESS STATEMENT
      MALCOLM FRASER         23 March, 1967

          THE ANZAC COMMEMORATIVE MEDALLION AND LAPEL BADGE

          Last March the Minister for Defence announced that the 
      Australian and New Zealand Governments had decided to issue a 
      Medallion and Lapel Badge to the veterans of the Gallipoli 
      Campaign.
          The Army has been given the job of producing the Medallion 
      and of issuing as many as possible to Gallipoli veterans or to the 
      next-of-kin before Anzac Day.
          This means that a good deal of work will have to be done, 
      not only in producing the Medallion, but also in processing all 
      the applications that will come forward.
          The Medallion will have the name of the veteran inside 
      and it will be issued to all surviving members of the Australian 
      Defence Force who served on the Gallipoli Peninsula or in direct 
      support to the members from close off-shore, during the period 
      from the first Anzac Day in April, 1915 to the final evacuation 
      in January the following year.
          Next-of-kin will be entitled to receive the Medallion on 
      behalf of their relative if the relative died in active service 
      or has since died.
          The Lapel Badge will be available for wearing but only 
      for those who actually served in Gallipoli, it will not be 
      issued to next-of-kin.
          The Medallion was designed by Mr. Raymond Ewers, based on 
      suggestions that came from the Department of the Army. It will 
      be about three inches high and two inches wide, one side of the 
      Medallion shows Simpson and the donkey carrying a wounded soldier 
      to safety and on the lower half there will be a laurel wreath 
      above the word "Anzac". The other side of the Medallion will 
      show Australia and New Zealand superimposed by the Southern Cross.
          I have already suggested that all those who wish to apply

f A

                 2.

     for a Medallion should contact - The Officer in Charge of the 
     Central Army Records Office at Albert Park Barracks in Melbourne. 
     On the other hand, if enquiries are sent direct to me, I will 
     see that they are processed as quickly as possible.
        I have also approached the R.S.L. and the Gallipoli
     Legions seeking their cooperation in helping to get relevant 
     information from the Gallipoli veterans.
        This will greatly help the Army in processing any particular 
     application.
        To avoid having to ask additional questions which might 
     delay the issue of the Medallion and Lapel Badge, applications 
     should include the full name, regimental number and unit in which 
     the applicant served in Gallipoli and the present private address.

