<!--start metadata-->
Title: Committee of Enquiry into Defence Services, Prices Averaging Plan wool marketing
Description: Radio talk
Date: 25/10/1970
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                / ` r
                     Sunday 25th October, 3HA 
RADIO TALK          Thursday 29th October, 3YB

      (By Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon and Minister for Defence)


     This week I would like to talk with you about an enquiry of historic 
importance in the life of Australian Services — a new service for farmers and 
success of the Prices Averaging Plan wool marketing scheme.

     After considerable planning and work, I am pleased that the Cabinet and 
Parliament have approved my call for an enquiry which I consider to be of historic 
importance in the life of the Australian Armed Services.

     The Government has decided to appoint a Committee of Enquiry to make a 
thorough study of the duties and responsibilities of officers and to recommend 
appropriate salary rates.

     The Committee will also review the working of the pay system for sailors, 
soldiers and airmen where civilian industrial award rates are translated into rates of 
pay for skilled other ranks of the Forces.

     An important feature of the Committee's work will be to examine the demands 
and exigencies of Service life as they affect all ranks and their families.

     The five or six—man Committee will be headed by Mr. Justice Kerr, a judge 
of the Commonwealth Industrial Court since 1966, and a man who has had extensive 
experience in the fields of industrial relations and wage fixing. He is also a man 
who has played an active part in community affairs and who served with the 2nd AIF 
from 1942— 1946.

     I believe that Servicemen and women would prefer to have the major aspects 
of their pay and financial conditions of employment given thorough examination by a 
body detached from their employing organisations in the Government area...by men who
 are equipped to draw relevant comparisons with pay and conditions in the civilian 
community.

     I hope that the principles and concepts developed by the Committee will 
provide lasting guidelines for the determination of Services pay and allowances in 
the future.

     Briefly, some of the terms of reference for the Committee are:

      To enquire and establish principles and concepts which should
      apply in determining the pay of officers and to recommend appropriate 
      salary rates based on qualifications, training, levels of skill 
      and responsibilities.

                          /2

                            2.
        ^ To review the practical working of the system which applies to other
          ranks pay, and the implications of automatic application of civilian 
          wage adjustments.
        • To examine the demands and exigencies of Service life as they affect all
          ranks, and if it is considered necessary the Committeewìll recommend 
          revised financial assistance.
       When making its recommendations the Committee will, of course, be fully 
aware of the national requirement to attract and retain men and women who have 
the needed qualities, skills and experience for the Armed Forces.
        To assist the Committee of Enquiry, each of the three Services has been 
asked to appoint a special consultant to be available full time to provide technical 
and specialist information on Service matters.
        The Government's objective is to develop further the defence force Australia 
requires and to attract and retain the men and women that force needs.
        I believe the Committee of Enquiry will make its contribution to that 
objective in a situation of formidable competition from civilian employment.
                        ....000. ..
        The Commonwealth Government is to take new steps to provide information 
to farmers on market prospects.
        To achieve this, the Government has decided to hold an annual agricultural 
outlook conference which will collect as much information as possible on market
prospects.
        The information collected will be given maximum possible publicity 
and circulation to farmers.
        I must stress that the Government will not be telling primary producers 
what they should — or should not — produce as this is a matter for their own
judgment.
        However, because of the difficulties in the rural community, farmers 
and farmer organisations have been seeking more and more information so they can 
adjust their own production levels, or diversify, according to what they think will
bring them the best income.
        I should point out that a great deal of information is already provided 
by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics which publishes such journals as "Wheat 
Outlook" and "Wool Outlook" among others.
        The planned agricultural outlook conference will be convened by the
Bureau of Agricultural Economics and will include State Governments Representatives... 
extension officers....officers of the C.S.I.R.O. and members of agricultural
organisations.                          /3

                                3.
         Rural industry organisations...marketing bodies and Governments 
will present papers to the conference and general discussion and exchange 
of ideas will take place at the conference.
         I expect that information from the conference will help the primary 
producer on how much and what, he should or should not produce. However, 
I repeat that the Government will not be telling primary producers what 
to do as this is a matter for the producers' own judgment.
                           ....oOo... .
         Information I sought this week shows clearly that the operations of 
the Australian Wool Marketing Corporation are proving to be advantageous to 
the woolgrower.
         Although the Price Averaging Plan marketing scheme conducted by 
the Corporation has only been operating since the commencement of the current 
wool selling season, it is evident it is successful.
         By the operation of its flexible reserve prices, the Corporation has 
been able to prevent the sale of lots of P.A.P. wool at unreasonably low
prices in relation to current market levels. This has undoubtedly been to the 
advantage of the woolgrower.
         The Corporation has also been able to re—sell wool, passed on to it, 
at a higher price and in all cases has ensured a profit above the original 
bid prices.
         So far the lot size has been increased from last season's average of 
4.2 bales per lot to about six bales per lot this season and it is expected
to further increase as the season progresses. The reduction in the number of 
small lots will reduce handling and selling costs, including buyers' costs of 
inspection.
         Current P.A.P. offerings account for about 18% of all wool offered 
at auction and by the end of the current selling season this is expected to 
rise to about 25%. Ultimately, it is hoped that all small lots, representing 
about 40% of the clip, will be brought into the scheme.
         I see the encouraging results of the Price Averaging Plan pointing up 
benefits which can flow on from the Government's proposed Australian Wool 
Commission.

                            ...000....

