<!--start metadata-->
Title: Trade with the United States, meat bill
Description: press statement
Date: 30/08/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     PRESS STATE1 NT

     MALCOLM FRASER :


                                                    August 30th,1964


                 During the past few days a compromise Meat Bill has passed 
     through both Houses of the United States Congress, and it has been signed by 
     the President.

                  I have spoken to people in our own Government Departments 
     and to the American Agricultural Attache, trying to get a clear, concise 
     answer about the mechanism and the effect of this Bill. No simple answer
     is available. It is clear, however, that the compromise Meat Bill is much 
     much more favourable from Australia's point of view than the Bill that was 
     previously passed by the Senate, and which would have restricted our
     exports to the United States to 160,000 tons. It has been said that this 
     new Bill will allow us to export about 204,000 tons, which is midway between 
     the United States Senate proposal and the voluntary agreement negotiated 
     between our two Governments. However, I think even this is inaccurate. 
     It appears that the measure is hedged around with so many conditions and so 
     many subsidiary clauses that it may mean everything or nothing.

•                The Americans I have spoken to, clearly do not expect the 
     provisions of the Bill to be used, provided nothing drastic happens to the 
    American market. This is certainly their hope, and it must also be ours.

                 The legislation also gives the United States President over- 
     riding powers if he does not want to invoke the clauses of the Act. If 
     he wishes he can say there are national interests involved which make it 
     necessary for him not to apply the Act.

                 The measure does seem to have satisfied cattle interests in 
     the United States. Perhaps they find it just as hard to understand as we do.

                 There is one thing we should not forget in this matter. The 
    United States Administration as opposed to the United States Congress was very 
    much on our side. It was the Administration that had pressed for and 
    negotiated the voluntary agreement hoping that this would enable them to with- 
    stand Congressional pressure. The Administration also had its eye on the 
    wider field. The Kennedy-round tariff negotiations are to take place some 
    time in the future. One of the United States' objectives is to break down 
    tariff barriers on agricultural products into Europe. The United States! 
    bargaining position would have been extraordinarily weak if the Europeans 
    could say - "This is what you argue we should do, but look how viciously 
    you have restricted meat imports from Australia." It appears that this has 
    now been avoided.

                 One of the interesting phases of the discussions that took place 
    about this Bill was revealed in our newspapers of August 18th. Our Prime 
    Minister had written to the President setting out in plain terms some of the 
    facts of life about trade relationships between our two countries. The 
    Frime Minister had pointed out that the loss to Australia from the Bill as 
    passed in the United States if Australia cut off imports of American tobacco, 
    cigarettes, cotton, tractors, harvesting machines and aircraft. The United 
    States exports of these products to us totalled about £28,000,000 last year. 
    This was not, in fact, a threat of retaliation, but it was laying the facts 
    on the line. Under the rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 
    Australia would have had a right to restrict imports from the United States 
    if the United States had acted as her Senate had wished.

                Our Prime Minister also pointed out that our general trade 
    relationship with the United States is very much in favour of that country,




                                                                 /2

                - 2


being over £200,000,000 in favour of the United States.

     The substance of the letter was leaked in the United States to 
the press, and it is probable that it had some part in making the compromise 
arrangements possible. It was clear it was not only the beef interests 
which were involved in the United States, but also other areas producing 
these products named in the Prime .Níinister's letter.

     Australia will have to watch this matter closely. We have been 
fortunate in that this year good markets for meat have opened in the United 
Kingdom, Italy and Greece, so while our exports have risen there has been 
no necessity and no pressure on the American market, at least from us. 
If the European markets failed and we wished to send all our meat to the 
United States, a situation could arise that would have to be watched very 
closely. It seems, however, that the compromise agreement reached in the 
United States should not greatly damage our interests. The vagueness of 
its terms and the conditions attached to it make any firmer conclusion 
difficult.


                 -000

