<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor government, rural policy
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 24/03/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


      PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA               PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
      HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES              CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 
                                            TEL. 721211

 FOR INFORMATION OF GALLERY      EMBARGO: SUNDAY, 
                                 24 I L! LCII, 1974. 



      ELECTORAL STATEI°Ii~fi1T BY I.I'HE HON. MALCOLM FRASER 
      LIBERAL PARTY SPOKESMAN ON LABOUR IÍ°IMIGRATION 
                   SUNDAY , 24 MARCH, ~974. 


     In 1972 the Australian Labor Party campaigned for
 open government.  They claimed that the Liberal and 
 Country Party Government did not make full and adequate 
 information available to the Australian public and to the 
 Parliament. Last week'I moved an Urgency Motion which
 was supported by Mr. Andrew Peacock. It was really a plea 
 for information from the Minister for Immigration concerning 
 the Government's immigration programme.

     The Minister has claimed a large number of new 
 initiatives.

     There are reports of trade qualification teams visiting 
 a number of Asian countries and there are the Prime 
 Minister's flamboyant statements in the Philippines.

     All this has led to a great deal of confusion and 
 concern in the minds. of the Australian public, but
particularly in, the minds of some elements of the trade
union movement.   We were asking for facts. We were not 
expressing opinions or judgements, but we were wanting to 
know the direction of Government policy.

    If we can get information about that it might then be 
possible to make judgements about the policy itself.

    When Mr. Grassby spoke after me,in the debate he 
answered none of the questions I asked. I then placed
about 25 questions on the Notice Paper, These are some of 
the questions:

Does last week's announcement mean that the Government is 
now embarking on a major campaign to recuirt skilled persons 
from Asia, the Pacific and South American countries 7

Does the Government's actions last week mean that the
Government intends a major change in the composition of
the Australian people or in the composition of the skilled 
tradesmen in Australia ?

                        2.

Have the consequences of such a policy been thought through ?

Have there been discussions with South East Asian countries 
about pending Australian efforts to attract skilled 
tradesmen from them ?

Does the Government believe that Aistralia has a greater 
need for such skilled tradesmen than their own countries ?
How does the Government intend to balance the potential 
wishes of skilled Asian tradesmen against the need of their 
own countries ?

    I also asked questions about the 'Easy Visa' system 
because the Minister himself has said that a very substantial 
number of people from one country have abused the system. 
However, we have no knowledge about the general situation 
across the 50 or 60 countries to which the system applies. 
A series of questions in this regard remain unanswered.

    I also asked a series of questions which were designed 
to get at the changes that the Minister has made in relation 
to migration from the U.K. and from Europe.

    This is an important matter. It is of consequence to
all Australians, old and new, and we have a right to an
answer.   Mr. Peacock and Mr_. King both supported me, but
we were all left with no information. It will be interesting 
to see what Mr. Grassby does with the Questions on Notice.




    A little earlier in the Parliament there was an Urgency 
Debate on rural policy and the Prime Minister himself must 
have regretted his phrase when he said: "Farmers have
never had it so good".  That would sound pretty hollow 
to all those who were suCfering from the extreme floods in
 ;ueensland and New South vJnles, and I also believe it would 
sound very hollow to those :i: nrers who for 10 years were 
suffering because of low world prices and a very severe
drought.  As a result of these two things, farm debt levels 
had risen to record heights.

    That is one of the reasons why in our new policy we are 
determined to establish a rural bank and a farm income reserve 
fund to help farmers even out fluctuations in their income.

                                                 ••./3

                         3e

    As I have mentioned before, details of our new rural 
policy are available and I would be happy to send copies to
any individuals who want it.  I believe it is a
comprehensive and a useful document. Amongst other things 
there is a commitment to re-establish incentives for fodder, 
soil and water conservation.


    The fact that Australia is a lucky country was brought 
sharply to notice during the Parliamentary Luncheon given 
in honour of President Nyerere of Tanzania.
    He made a speech and with good humour emphasised that
he was speaking only of Tanzania. He said he was not a 
missionary and was not trying to suggest that various
matters he was discussing were in any way relevant or related 
to Australia, but he pointed out that Tanzania had an average 
income of ';r70 Australian per head - this in a country that 
is short of raw materials and has only the skill and capacity
of their own people.  Their human resources are their
greatest resources.  That is principally true of any country, 
but many others, including Australia, have very significant 
natural resources in addition that make the task of people 
fundamentally easier than is the case of Tanzania.
    He gave as another example that 20 percent of the Gross 
National Product is spent on education, but only 50 percent 
of the children of Tanzania attend any primary schoel.
    I think if we had a better understanding of the real 
poverty and the real difficulties of many people around the 
world we might be less selfish at times and less inward
looking.   We might have less pre-occupation with domestic 
affairs where our problems might appear to be infinitesimal, 
compared with the problems that our recent guest has to 
contend with.•

