<!--start metadata-->
Title: United States aircraft carrier "Enterprise"
Description: press statement
Date: 20/09/1964
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PRESS STATEIvENT:

       MALCOLM FRASER :

                                                         September 20th,1964



                     UNITED STATES AIRCRAFT CARRIER "ENTERPRISE"


                     A few days ago the United States Naval Attache asked me to 
       visit the United States aircraft-carrier "Enterprise" when she was off the
       coast of Victoria. In the United States I had seen several units of the 
       Fleet, but I had not seen a large nuclear carrier and so this was an 
       opportunity not to be missed.

                      The carrier sent small anti-submarine aircraft to Essendon 
       to pick up the few people who had been asked to go on board. After about 
       half-an-hour's flight we landed smoothly on the 42 acres of flight deck.

                     The sheer size of this carrier is quite fantastic and some- 
       thing that it is difficult to visualise. It is unfortunate that because of 
       the narrow gap into Port Phillip Bay the carrier was unable to visit Melbourne 
       where many more people could have seen her.
•                    She is about 86,000 tons, and her eight nuclear reactors 
       can send her through the water at up to 40 miles an hour.

                     Everything about this ship is spacious. This nuclear 
       carrier and her two nuclear escorts - one destroyer and one cruiser - 
       are designed to be able to stay at sea for protracted periods without 
       taking on additional fuel or stores. It is possible to do this, of course, 
       because the storage capacity normally used for fuel oil can be used for 
       other purposes on a nuclear ship. The purpose of this cruise of these 
       three nuclear vessels is to demonstrate that ships can stay at sea for very 
       long periods without taking on additional supplies. Indeed, after a cruise 
       around the world during which there will have been several fire power 
       displays these ships will get back to the United States with enough fuel in 
       their reactors to travel around the world a few times, enough armaments for 
       more than a week's continuous high level fighting and enough food for the 
       men for a further protracted period. These are the benefits of nuclear power.

                     We were given a demonstration with a geiger-counter to show 
       quite convincingly that there is less radioactivity from the reactors than a 
       person would normally get from the luminous dial on a wrist watch. Indeed, 
       after demonstration in which my own watch was involved I almost felt like 
       throwing the watch overboard.

                     After a tour of the ship and an inspection of the seven 
       different types of aircraft on board we were taken to a vantage point to 
       witness the fire power demonstration. This involved the large Vigilante 
       nuclear bomber, the smaller powerful Phantom aircraft that is used in this 
       ship as a fighter but which can also be used as an attack bomber, and several
       smaller aircraft. Nearly all the aeroplanes on board were, of course, 
       supersonic, and two of them flew past the carrier at supersonic speeds to 
       give us an example of the impact of the sonic boom, which seemed to shake the 
       whole ship. This is the shock wave caused by aircraft travelling at speeds 
       faster than the speed of sound - it is something which doesn't much worry 
       military aircraft, but which is going to cause considerable difficulties 
       when civil transports start travelling at these speeds, ovdr the towns and 
       villages in different countries.

                     During this fire power demonstration we saw a convincing 
       demonstration of the accuracy of certain missiles, some of which are used 
       by the Australian Air Force. Four parachute flares were dropped several

                                                                    /2

                                            2




        hundred yards from the ship, then some aircraft at great speed crossed the 
        bow of "Enterprise" and released their side-winder rocket missiles. These 
        are missiles that will home on anything that gives out some heat. The
        side-winders homed on the flares, scored a bull's-eye and shot the flares 
        down.

                      "Enterprise" has several steam catapults which are essential 
        to get jet aircraft off a carrier; in something like 250 feet a ten ton
        or eleven ton aircraft can be brought up to speeds well in excess of 100
        miles an hour so that they can be successfully launched.   With the
        several catapults it is possible to get a very large strike or protective 
        force into the air in a very short time.

                      It has been said that this carrier contains greater fire power 
        than all the conventional bombs dropped during the second world war. Quite 
        obviously it has tremendous nuclear capability, but this does not mean that 
        its conventional armaments are to be despised - they are exceedingly accurate
        and powerful and these, of course, were the ones whose demonstration we 
        obverved.
•
                      "Enterprise" represents a tremendous amount of investment in 
        one ship, and therefore if she is used in any theatre of war it is essential 
        that she can protect herself or be adequately protected. For these purposes 
        her radar screen is extended by an aeroplane that can fly above her and thus 
        observe anything that might be trying to approach her below the normal radar 
        screen on the ship. The cruiser and the destroyer sailing with her are, of 
        course, armed with the latest surface-to-air and surface-to-surface missiles
        for protection against aeroplanes or attack by sea. They also have on 
        board the latest anti-submarine devices.


                      The whole task force, called Task Force 1, is a most 
        convincing display of the effectiveness of sea and air power combined.

                      After about four hours on board we were flown back in the 
        anti-submarine aircraft to Essendon.




•

