<!--start metadata-->
Title: Soldier settlement and the dairying industry
Description: Radio 3HA and 3YB - radio talk
Date: 3/08/1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


•    ~                                                   3H-            1 /J-g-
                                                         -1)-- 8       6 fr/rer---


                    SOLDIER SETTLEMENT AND THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY
                          By: Malcolm Fraser, Member for Wannon.

                A few days ago certain members of the State Soldier Settlement 
      Commission attacked the Commonwealth over the Yanakie Soldier Settlement
      Scheme.   According to the press statement in "The Age", members of the 
      Commission said that the Commonwealth Government had refused to support a 
      12,000 acre subdivisional soldier settlement scheme at Yanakie near Foster
      in South Gippsland.   A member of the Commission went on to say that the 
      Commonwealth would not consider any dairying scheme - only sheep.

                It was also reported that the Commission had met with continual 
      Commonwealth opposition in its endeavours to place ex-servicemen on the land, 
      particularly on dairying land.

                When I saw this report, I immediately contacted the Federal
      Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. McMahon, who looks after the Commonwealth 
      aspect of soldier settlement,

                Mr. McMahon said quite emphatically that the Yanakie Scheme has
      not been rejected.  He said, contrary to the Commonwealth rejecting the 
      State proposal for Yanakie, the basis of the proposal put forward by the State 
      has been accepted in principle except that there are still technical dis- 
      cussions to be held on the size of the actual farms.

                Allegations that the Commonwealth was opposing State attempts to 
      put ex-servicemen on the land, particularly on dairying land, were completely 
      untrue, Mr. McMahon continued,

                In the past three years, the Commonwealth has made special 
      additional funds available to Soldier Settlement in Victoria, to try and
      speed up the completion of Soldier Settlement in this State.     Since 
      1955/56, special funds have totalled £5.18M.

                This controversy underlines the difficult dairy situation at the
      present time.   The dairy industry is faced with falling and failing overseas
      markets.   Policies of self-sufficiency in the United States and in all 
      European countries, together with uncontrolled production of margarine in 
      those countries, have turned butter importing countries into butter exporting
      countries.   The only butter importing country of any significance is the
      U.K., and all countries with surpluses try to sell their butter to her with 
      the result that the price has fallen to completely uneconomic levels.
      There is no sign that this trend in overseas countries will alter.

                Furthermore, I don't believe significant new markets in Asian 
      countries will be found for butter at prices acceptable to our producers, 
      for the simple reason that margarine is a cheaper article, and as the 
      standard of living of these people rises, they will be able to afford 
      margarine before they will be able to afford butter, and therefore they 
      will get the margarine habit before the butter habit.

                These overseas conditions make it extremely difficult for the
      Australian dairying industry.  Local consumption is just under 120,000 tons, 
      leaving a surplus of anything from 50 to 80 or 90 thousand tons to export,
      depending on seasons.   We can only sell this butter at a heavy loss.  To 
      make up some of this loss, the Commonwealth has its stabilisation scheme
      and subsidy, which totals E131- million this year. But this is not the 
      whole answer to the problem.

                I believe the Commonwealth does not want to carry out a great 
      deal more closer settlement on dairying blocks since each additional 
      pound of butter produced is an additional pound of butter exported, which 
      lowers the average return for every existing dairy farmer.


                                                                              /2

•   •




       ~                                   2.


                Most good dairy land is also suitable for fat lamb raising, but 
       slightly larger acreages are required.

                In discussions with the State Soldier Settlement Commission, I 
       have no doubt that Commonwealth officers have put forward the view that we 
       should take into account not only what the land will produce, but also
       what we can sell.  We can sell fat lambs or wool, for which there are no
       real substitutes.  We are finding it ever increasingly difficult to sell
       our butter abroad.  Therefore, why not increase the production of meat 
       or of wool rather than of butter, but the decision on this is one that must
       be made by the State because constitutionally it is their right. However, 
       the State in its decision should have some regard for the Commonwealth 's 
       marketing problems.

                Victoria has taken the view that it is the most economic dairying
       State in Australia.  This is correct.   However, this does not necessarily 
       mean it is sensible to continually increase Victorian production of butter. 
       It would be allright to do this if we thought it reasonable to force butter 
       producers in other States to close up shop; but in a free society, can we
       use this form of dictation?  Butter producers have existed in other States
       for as long as they have existed in Victoria.   They have a right to a 
       livelihood as have the producers of Victoria.

                It is true, production and exports from other States have been 
       falling over the years as farmers gradually realise dairying is not 
       climatically suited to their areas, but this is a different thing from
       force.  Already three States only barely produce enough for their own
       needs.  Victoria produces very nearly 70% of Australia's export butter.
       Adding to that quantity only serves to embarrass the whole industry.

                I believe that the basic reason why the State is keen on 
       settlement in the dairying industry is that it is possible to put more 
       people on a given amount of land because the return per annum from dairying
       is greater than wool growing or fat lamb raising.  This therefore means 
       that the cost to place people on dairying land is less than the cost to
       place people on other forms of production.  Nevertheless, if this is 
       true, it is a short-term policy which will not do the industry any good.

                Finally, I want to repeat that the Commonwealth has not opposed
       State propositions for soldier settlement.  It has supported soldier 
       settlement in Victoria since 1955/56, with additional funds totalling 
       over E5,000,000.

                On the other hand, I am sure it has put its views about the 
       difficulty of the dairying industry and the difficulty of disposing of
       export butter.   But this is very different from opposing the State's 
       plans.

