<!--start metadata-->
Title: Defence White Paper
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 2/04/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


     TEXT OF BROADCAST BY   3HA Sunday 2 April, 1972. 
     THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER3YB Thursday 6 April, 1972. 
                            3LK Tuescay 4 April, 1972.




         Hello ladies and gentlemen.

         In Parliament last week the Minister for Defence,
     Mr. Fairbairn, made a major statement on defence and at the
     same time tabled a White Paper on the subject. This was a
     most important occasion because the Government's advisors had
     for several months been engaged in a comprehensive re—examination.
     of the nation's strategic position.
•        Perhaps the most important reason for this assessment 
     is that Australia is in a part of the world which is undergoing 
     great changes and the Government considers it vital that 
     Australia should be involved in those changes in every respect — 
     economic, social, diplomatic and military.

         I don't want to attempt in a brief broadcast to dissect 
     Mr. Fairbairn's speech entirely, but I would like to put before 
     you one or two of the main points he made which are fundamental 
     to the Government's approach.

         We believe Australia in the 1970's and 1980's must base 
     its approach to defence on two premises — the need for a greater 
     degree of self reliance, and closer defence links with our
•    friends to the north, as'well as maintenance of traditional 
     defence relationships. This duality in our requirements is 
     perhaps the most significant emerging feature in our defence 
     policy.

         Bearing in mind the degree of self reliance the 
     Government considers necessary for Australia, we are working 
     to ensure that all three services, the Army, Navy and Airforce, 
     are well equipped and up to strength. For instance we consider 
     that the role we envisage for the forces will require
     maintenance of a Regular Army of about 40,000, and in the field 
     of equipment, the Chiefs of Staff and the Department of Defence 
     are currently together analysing some 70 larger weapons systems 
     and major equipment which the services consider desirable in 
     the foreseeable future.



                                 .../2

       But of paramount importance is our involvement in 
   our region. While our political opponents have preached 
   withdrawal and_ isolation, the Government by positive diplomacy 
   and defence cooperation, has achieved a unique standing in 
   Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia. Our physical presence in 
   the region is an integral part of the five—power defence 
   arrangement — Malaysia, Singapore, Britain, New Zealand and 
   Australia — a most useful contribution to security. Without 
   our tangible contribution to the agreement there is no doubt 
   our Asian allies would suffer a lack of confidence in the five— 
   power agreement.
•      Australia has to be ready for dangerous contingencies 
   and must do this both through cooperation with our allies and 
   the establishment of our ability to act alone in the kind of 
   circumstances we can conceive developing in our region. I 
   emphasise this is consistent with the American hopes of 
   progressively negotiating understandings which would reduce 
   tensions among the four great powers — the Soviet Union, China, 
   the United States and Japan.
       But we must acknowledge that if old security daggers 
   recede, some new ones may take their place. While the Government 
   naturally prefers that Australia should not be involved in 
   insurgent situations in South—East Asia at all, it is essential
•  that if it is in the national interest to become involved, and 
   this can be clearly identified, then we should have the physical 
   capacity to do so. We must be able to provide the kind of 
   support which will enable local forces in the area of insurgency 
   to acquit themselves effectively against their adversaries.
       Finally I want to emphasise the fact that the Government 
   continues to attach great significance to the ANZUS Treaty. The 
   American commitments to Australia under that treaty are as
   strong and effective as ever. The Soviet naval presence in the 
   Indian Ocean is a disturbing influence. It is certainly a weapon 
   in a Soviet diplomatic offensive in the Indian Ocean states, 
   including those from which vital petroleum supplies are obtained. 
   Our response has been to encourage a Western reaction to this 
   presence adequate to demonstrate to the countries of the Indian 
   Ocean that that ocean does not, and will not, become a Russian 
   preserve and that Western interests there remain positive and 
   well secured.

                  3.

       This is the kind of reaction from our allies that we 
   seek to obtain throughout our part of the world, a reaction 
   based on involvement from which springs understanding, and not 
   from isolation, wherein lies the danger of conflict.

       Goodbye for now.





•











•

