<!--start metadata-->
Title: Health Insurance Plan, special bonds for small holders
Description: radio talk
Date: c1958
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                         Today I want to speak about two small but important measures t 34419
 which we introduced into the Federal Parliament in the last two
 weeks of the Spring Session. Unfortunately I was not present in 
 Parliament at that time because I t.ad caught Hepatitis.
                         The first of these concerns the Government's Health Insurance
 Plan.              Several years ago the Government introduced a Health Insurance
 Plan which has made it possible for by far the greater part of the 
 population to insure themselves against sickness and medical expenses.
 of one kind or another.                                        Infividuals or families who are insured under 
 such scheme get a vary considerable return for small weekly payments.
For ire tâne : , one well Known society has a maximum rate of 6/- per 
week and for this figure alt4 a man's whole family can be insured 
and if any member of the family gets sick, considerable part of the
hospital or medical expenses involved are paid either by the Government
or the bociety.                            However, thole was one drawback vith the scheme when
it was first introduced .                                       T e ag              or people 'w:ith long s éalluing 
chronic complaints cf one kind cr another were not accepted for insurance. 
The original reason for this was that if too (:any of these people 
enter .:d the insurance schemes it might piece too great a strain on
resources of the Societies operating the :creme.                                                                       However, the Govern- 
ment has long recognised the needs of these people and a Bill was 
introduced and passed which enables hospital and medical insurance 
organisations to establ i h special accounts for the payments of
benefits to the aged, to persons with pre-e 3isting_ ailments and 
to the chronically ill. The benefit of insurance to such people should
be only too obvious.                                 At the present it is estimated that roughly 
70% of the Australian population is covered by the insurance scheme. 
This new legislation should enable this proportion to be considerably 
increased.
                            The second thing I want to mention concerns the announcement 
by the Frime Minister about new special bonds for small holders. 
Previously there had been considerable drawbacks for people wishing
       invest in Government bonds if they wanted to cash the bonds before 
                         .A bond for which a person had paid £100 might have fallen
11                   l40, although of course if it were kept for the full period
       ‘400,..S.Aeorth £100.                                The reasons for this are complicated

and I will give just one. Hire purchase business has tended to 
 force up all interest rates and because Government bonds were on 
 a fixed rate of interest, investors have found other avenues more
 profitable.  Therefore on the open market, Government bonds tended
 to fall in value.  This kind of thing cannot happen for these new 
 special bonds. They can be bought at any time until further notice 
 in any multiple of £10. The maximum that any person may invest
 in these bonds is £5,000.  However if you want to sell your bonds 
 and get cash before the maturing date of 1st January, 1966, it is 
 possible to do so It-ltc+ under the following conditions:-
 Any time after July 1st, 1959, if you give one month's notice you
 will be returned the full face value of the bonds. This holds 
 good up to the end of 1961, then to the end of 1963 you will be 
 returned £101 for every £100 invested; from the beginnin., of 
 1964 to the end of 1965 ytou will be returned £102 for every £100 
 invested and if the bonds are held to maturity in 1966, £103 Mar
  every £100 invested will be returned.
           The two important innovations in these new special bonds 
  are, firstly, the capital appreciation and, secondly, the fact that 
  after the middle of 1959 on one month's notice the bonds will be
  redeemed by the Government at face value. This means that investors 
  who need their cash before tine full maturity of the loan will be
  sure of getting full value. The bonds have been chosen especially
  to attract small investors.
           In addition to this special return which gives investors 
  a small capital gain for the full period, these bonds are offered 
  at special rates of interest which are more attractive than normal 
  Government rates. They are a good investment for small holders and 
  unlike previous Government issues there is no possibility of there 
  being any loss of capital through the necessity to cash the bonds 
  before maturity. If anyone would like more detailed information 
  In this I would be only too happy to obtain it if they get in touch
     h me.

