<!--start metadata-->
Title: Australian Banking Development Refinance Corporation
Description: press statement
Date: 12/04/1967
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


i

         PRESS STATEMENT
         MALCOLM FRASER 12 APRIL, 1967

             A short while ago the Treasurer announced 
         the formation of the Australian Banking Development 
         Refinance Corporation.

             This decision has been made after very 
         full discussions between the Government and the 
         Private Trading Banks. The purpose of the new 
         Corporation is to help raise large scale funds for 
         Australia for the development of the vast natural 
         resources that have been and are still being 
         discovered in Australia.
             It is well known that over recent years 
         there has been a high rate of overseas investment 
         in iron ore, oxide and oil resources and the 
         Government has been seeking ways and means to gain 
         an increased Australian investment in major fields 
         of this kind.
             Up to the present time Australians have not 
         been able to take full advantage of these opportunities 
         because many individual developers have found 
         difficulty in raising the funds that are necessary 
         and thus, in numerous instances, overseas funds have 
         been sought.
             It is hoped that this new corporation will 
         redress the balance, at least to some extent.

       -2-

    In short terms, the purpose of the new 
Corporation is to expand Australia's ownership 
and control in imrlortant major fields of national 
development. The new institution is yet one more 
new development in the evolution of the Australian 
Banking system and it complements our entering new 
areas such as the term loan and farm loan development 
funds which have been introduced in recent times.

    The capital mobilized by the new institution 
will add to the direct overseas investment that has 
done much and will continue to do much for the 
development of Australia's major resources.
    The Australian trading banks, with the support 
of the Reserve Bank, will establish a corporation to 
mobilise capital to enable Australian investors to 
establish or to participate, if necessary, with
overseas investors in large scale productive enterprises 
in Australia.
    Strong emphasis will be placed on strengthening 
Australian ownership and control in the development of 
natural resources, particularly minerals, oil and gas.

    The trading banks will provide the share capital 
and will make loans to it. The Reserve Bank will lend 
to the Corporation amounts proportionate to the loans the 
Corporation receives from the trading banks.

        -3-


    It will have power to borrow and will 
accept longer-term deposits and other forms of 
fixed-interest borrowing. It will have the 
financial strength of the Australian banking 
system supporting it and thus will be in a position 
to attract funds from the public.
    It would be difficult to tell in precise 
terms how this Corporation will work, but it is an 
important step and it could do much to encourage 
the development of Australia's great resources by 
Australians for Australia.

