<!--start metadata-->
Title: Gair's appointment to Ireland, foreign policy
Description: Draft radio broadcast
Date: 7/04/1974
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


  DRAFT - RADIO BROADCAST
         ~.------
          The Parliament was stunned at the news- of Senator Gair's
 appointment as Australian Ambassador to Irelald.                      The Prime 
 Minister obviously thought that this was a stroke of genuis. 
 Because of the coming Senate election the Prime Minister 
 and Senator Murphy believed that this would greatly increase
 Labor's chances of controlling the Senate.                    In other words, 
 Mr. Whitlam plainly believes that he is unlikely to gain a 
 majority in the Senate through normal democratic processes 
 and therefore he took a course of action whichjlikely to provide 
 him with an additional Labor Senator from Queensland -
    --action-which"--is-qui e vnprecendented'•fncP t illigm' i:tt TheJ
 Younger decided t was time,.__ r_fo ar.ish_Parli ent t-o-diso:ppear"
Yin 1801. v'-That might be the only thing ~that, ,,.the .present Prime--- 
 Minister has _:in_-common-wi-th-Wi.11_iam_Pit±-,W Primelqiïai"s_ter__of. ,thee ._
/United Kingdom.          In case our memories a.re,.-6hort, the kk.
 United Kingdom could not achieve its gill with the ,Irish Parliament     r°
 and'so William Pitt The Young considered the/master stroke-o      ;/
 buying out all the member -who were in the /Irish ish Parli,amenti n the most infamous chapte in BritiA
                                                         /            ~~//'
 1801.      It was probe y
 Parliamentary practice.

                                                                  ~
         HoweverT a ;Ly •s3 r--w-h Mr. Whitlam ceased
 to smile over this incident.              The Premier of Queensland acted 
 with characteristic speed and before Senator Gair's resignation 
 from the Senate became effective caused the writs for the election

                           2.

of the Senate to be issued in Queensland. This in effect
beats the purpose of the Prime Minister's manoeuvre. This 
comes about because normally there would be an election for
5 Senators in Queensland.  Mr. Whitlam hoped to achieve an election
for 6 by Senator Gair's appointment.  It is widelyâccepted,
having in mind the political climate in Queensland, that the 
Liberal, Country Party or D.L.P. will between them win 3 seats
and Labor 2.   If there were an election for 6 Senators for 
Queensland it would then be expected that Labour would win 3,
effectively giving them an additional Senatcr. As you can
imagine these quite unprecedented events involved the Senate 
and Members of the House of Representatives and a great deal of 
discussion and speculation occurred.


     Other important matters, as a result, have been put very
much in the sidelines.  The present Government can't make up its 
mind whether it wants a Russian scientific station or base in
Australia or not.  There ought to be no difficultyfb this
matter.  There ought to be a short and sharp refusal.

     Whatever the present Australian Government might feel, the 
great majority of Australians do not want to belong to the socialist
third world.  They do not want to foresake old friends. A
Russian scientific station or base in Australia could well frustrate
                                                      ..,/3

                             3.

the purpose of other joint space or defence communication 
facilities in Australia which are jointly operated between
Australia and the U.S.  At the worst the U.S. could regard 
agreement with the Russian request as so unfriendly that the
U.S. could consider withdrawal from ANZUS. I certainly hope 
that the U.S. will show patience over this matter, because the 
oddities of the present Government do not respect the wish of the 
Australian people in matters of this kind.


       The same thrust has been skon shown in the Government's 
attitude to the U.S. base at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. 
Recently Admiral Alan McNicoll one of the most distinguished 
former Chiefs of the Naval Staff asked why Mr. Whitlam sdeks to 
frustrate the plans of our major ally.

      Soviet supremacy in the Indian Ocean is without question 
in manpower and in tonnage. The Suez Canal is likely to be 
opened in a measurable period, and this will bring the Indian 
Ocean within a week's sailing of the Russian Mediterranean and
Black Sea fleets.  It will nëable her to link up this fleet
with the Pacific fleet in Vladivostock.  In recent years 
the Russian fleets have been expanded and modern ships have been
introduced.   The American fleet has been aging. The Soviet 
Union already has the infra-structure available to support
a much greater Soviet force in the Indian Ocean. The U.S.

                              4.

does not have that infra-structure. They might once have hoped 
to be able to use in part our base at Cockburn Sound which 
in earlier times I had discussed with them.

      Quite consistent with its past actions, the Government's
original proposals in this area were made against the U.S.  It 
was only when the nature of that approach became evident that 
the Government began to say that they would approach both the 
U.S. and the Soviet Union to try and establish a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean.   But that will deceive nobody. We have 
discouraged our major ally in this area from aùintaining 
effective surveillance and patrols in the Indiaan Ocean. 
addition we have no defence ourselves. We have an under-
developed, unuseful base at. Cockburn Sound. There are some
docking facilities at Darwin with nothing in between.  Ir all 
this vast area there may be 3 or 4 patrol boats which have no 
endurance at all once they leave the sheltered waters of the
Australia-1 coastline. They are not blue water ships and their 
range is almost non-existent.

      The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Snedden, has been active 
in pointing out the dangers of the Government's actions and 
in emphasising the Opposition's serious objection to the course
that the Government has taken.   Unfortunately travellers 
overseas now find that Australia is often regarded as a
member of the third world.   Travellers in Eastern Europe 
often find we are welcomed to the sociaFst fraternity.

                           S.

Our foreign policy dismays our friends whether they are
close to Australia or further afield.  The Government has 
certainly won support in Russia and China and in some part of
the third world. But how many people believe that makes
Australia safer or more secure.  There ought to be a way, 
and there is a way, to of maintaining Australia's essential 
interests, while at the same time establishing friendly
relationships with more and more countries in the world. The 
Government has chosen a much easier path and that of selling out
old friends in its effort to gain new ones.

