<!--start metadata-->
Title: Labor Government, expulsion from Parliament
Description: Electoral statement
Date: 18/11/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


       PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA               PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

       HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES              CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2800 
                                             TEL. 721211









FOR INFORMiATION OF PRESS GALLERY    EMBARGO: Sunday, 18th

                                               November





      ELECTORAL STATEMENT BY THE HON. T'ïi'iLCOLM FRASER,

      M. P. ,     -.2OR      - 'SUNDAY , 18 NOVEMBER




     Last Wednesday I was expelled from the Parliament for 


24 hours for the first time in nearly 20 years membership. 


I would be happy to send •a record of the Hansard to any 


person who is interested in looking at what happened.



     Basically the. Government is trying to push through


much too much legislation in too little time. This means


there is no room for adequate debate. The Government uses 


what is called the guillotine which is a vicious process 


which indicates the complete contempt for Parliament this 


Government has, and which puts an arbitrary and very .short


time limit on debate for important Bills. We have had 


innumerable examples of significant measures which have been


only, partly debated. They get forced through the House


of Representatives through weight of numbers with most of 


the clauses of the Bills going quite undebated and unexamined.



     The Government has tried to adopt this same technique 


with three Constitutional Bills which would result,in a 


referendum being held at the same time as the Senate election 


next year.



     One Bill will provide for the ITouse of Representatives 


and the Senate to be elected a;"the same time. .This


basically means a shortening of the term of office of all


Senators.- It would.also'weaken the independence of the


Senate.  •I am opposed to that. It is also quite unnecessary 


because the Government already has the power to have 


simultaneous elections.



     The second Bill is designed to change the constituional


basis for electoral boundaries. The Government is seeking


to do two things.  It wants to count the number of people 


in an electorate and it claims that it wants the same .number


of people to be in each electorate. It wants these views



                                                        2

                          2.

given constitiional force.   There is a difference between
the number of people in an electorate and the number of electors, 
because there are unenrolled New Australians or visitors from
overseas and obviously., there are unenrolled children. The 
proposal is basically designed to increase the representation in 
city areas and to reduce the representation in country areas. 
Electoral legislation was defeated earlier this year which would 
have taken something between 5 to 8 seats out of the country areas
and placed them in the cities.   The Government is now trying
to achieve the same result by another method.   It wants to 
reduce country representation and I won't have a bar of it.
     The third measure is designed to give the Government power 
to raise loans on behalf of Local Government and to make grants 
direct to Local Government rather than through the States as the
Commonwealth is now empowered to do.   While I believe Local 
Government needs greater support, I also believe this is the
wrong way, to do it.  firstly, there is no guarantee 'that more 
loan money would be available as a result of this change -- the loan
market is pretty fully utilised at the moment.   Secondly, we have 
seen the new regional proposals the Government is seeking to
implement.   It wants to take over Local Government and by-pass 
the States. Additional funds ought to be provided to Local 
Government, but it ought to be done in cooperation with and 
through the States.
     This means that the Opposition is opposing all three
measures.   We are being given a minimum of time to express 
our view.
     When the time came for the vote on the first measure 
the Speaker re-committed the question, and I was seeking to
raise a point of order with the Speaker.   I said that the 
question had been put and carried on tine voices and the
Clerk read,the Bill for tie third time.   That should have 
ended that particular.Bill, but in taking a point or order 
I said that the Opposition was trying to find out on what 
authority the Speaker put the question the second time. 
I suggested that there was no such authority and I also said 
that as the Bill was not carried by an absolute majority in 
the first instance, it had lapsed as far as the constitutional
amendment was concerned.   While I was putting this point of

                                                      .../3

                         7
order the Speaker had a conversation with one of the Clerks. 
There was some interchange between myself and the Speaker, 
and I believe that the point of order I was wanting to take
had not been fully put and had not been answered. I stressed 
the point and as a result the Speaker started the process which 
resulted in my being expelled from the House for 24 hours.
      I emphasise that I was seeking an explanation of a
certain course of action through a point of order. The 
Speaker gave me an opportunity to withdraw my remarks and as 
Hansard records I said:
      "Mr. Speaker, I would have been very pleased to withdraw 
      if the Opposition had been given the reason for the 
      second committal of the third reading of the Bill. 
      It has not been given the reason for that; s o, with 
      the greatest respect, I regret that I. cannot withdraw 
      my rémarks."
      I want to emphasise that none of this would have
occurred if the Government had allowed proper time for the 
debate of these very important measures and if the Leader of 
the House had not brought down a quite unnecessary guillotine.



      The Minister for Labour, Mr. Cameron, has introduced 
some proposals concerning trade training which the Opposition 
would strongly support.
      The Minister first made the announcement concerning
trade training some time ago. Apparently when he did so
he didn't have Government support for the measure. That
has now been achieved.
      I will continue to press Mr. Cameron to have these 
trade union training proposals widened so that industrial 
officers can get their training at least in part in the
same place as trade union officials. We need to break 
down barriers which may exist between management and
labour.  If industrial officers and trade union officials 
are in part at least educated in the same place it will
pe some way to achieve this.  I have written to Mr. Cameron 
on this matter.

