<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters, Grants Commission, China
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 3/06/1973
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0003
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115254&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


                                                      -75/9




        RADIO BROADCAST                 Sunday, 3rd June 3HA
                                         ednesday, 6th June 3LK 
        THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.   Thursday, 7th June 3YB











        Last week, the Parliamentary session ended. There has
        been the usual end of rush legislation and there has been
        a vigorous use of the guillotine which is a device designed
        arbitrarily to limit debate on a particular bill. These
        procedures prevented a large number of people speaking
        and it is had Parliamentary practice. I know some will
        say that the previous Government fell into the same
        error. It's true. In earlier times we did, but in
        the last year or two, we had introduced special
 •      procedures in which any bill that was going to be passed
        in the Parliament in a particular session would be
        introduced a certain minimum time before the end of
        the session.


        This was designed to give the Opposition plenty of time 
        to study the bill and to allow people time to debate it. 
        One of the distinctions that needs making in this session 
        is the importance of a large number of the bills which 
        have been introduced late and debated hurriedly.


        The Airlines Bill would have given a new authority power 
        to establish a complete monopoly of transport and would 
        have allowed the authority to enter into super spreading, 
        road transport and unlimited expansion of hotels. It 
        was certainly quite unnecessary for the efficient and 
        proper operation of the two airline system.


        The Pé plines Bill to establish a national gas pipeline 
•       would enable the authority involved in it to become a 
        monopoly buyer and a monopoly seller. It could say to 
        a particular company, we are not interested in your product. 
        We won't buy from you. We won't give you the right to 
        use the pipeline to carry your natural gas.


        The Submerged Lands Bill has been introduced without 
        any consultation with tile :.states. It has been delayed 
        in the Senate and I hope the State Premiers will press 
        for discussions concerning it, because part of this bill 
        establishes an off-shore mining code which has been 
        arbitrarily determined by the Commonwealth.


        The Grants Commission legislation gives to the Grants 
        Commission powers which it does not in fact need. It will 
        establish a new bureaucracy and further undermine the 
        authority of the States. I think I said last week that 
        there are much better ways of getting necessary additional 
        financial support for local government and I agree that 
        that financial support ought to come directly from the

                 2 -





    Commonwealth and no{ bypass the States.

    There has been a statement on Australian defence policy
    which is a quite tragic document, because I read it as
    laying the foundation for a break up of Australia's defence
    forces. The myth is beginning to be spread that we live
    in a world in which defence forces are no longer
    necessary. I would expect to see significant reduction
    in the defence vote as the years pass, if not in
    absolute terms, at least in relative terms. But the
    statement on defence and the statement on foreign
    policy, which I particularly wanted to participate in,
    were ones which were not properly debated because there
•   was not time given to them.

    Under this kind of pressure, the Parliament does not 
    work as effectively as it should as an instrument of 
    constructive criticism of the Government.

    No Australian likes double standards. There are too many 
    of them about. It's right for Australians to protest 
    about French nuclear tests in the atmosphere, but it is 
    wrong for Australians to protest about French nuclear 
    tests alone. The Government has threatened breaking off 
    diplomatic relations with France. I am certain they 
    won't do it, because they would then have to break off 
    diplomatic relationships with China, and they won't want 
    to do that. China's tests fall out over areas of maximum 
    population density. The French tests fall out over areas 
    of minimum population and while it is right to protest, 
    the protest should be made about both countries and not 
    merely about one. But of course to protest about the 
    Chinese tests would jeopardise Mr. Whitlam's efforts 
    in leading Australia into the third world and to Peking. he 
    doesn't do it. That is one fine example of a double 
    standard.

    A representative of Taiwan wanted to come to Australia - 
    as I understand it, as a private citizen for a conference. 
    He was refused a visa. Taiwan is a country with whom we 
    have had close and friendly relationships for many years. 
    Why should a citizen of Taiwan be refused a visa, coming 
    in a private capacity? Even though he is a member of the 
    Government it was not for a political discussion. It was so 
    that he could take part in a forum of the Pacific Basin 
    Economic Council, held in Sydney and opened by Mr. Whitlam. 
    I think we have only to compare this with pictures of 
    Jim Cairns, who seems now to take pride in being called 
    Chairman Jim, feting North Vietnamese and Viet Cong 
    delegates on a recent occasion in Sydney. There is no

                      3





     difficulty in getting into Australia at the moment if you 
     are a representative or if you come from any communist 
     power, but if you come from a number of other countries - 
     even as a private citizen - you are excluded.

     The refusal of the visa to the Taiwanese has just shown 
     this up plainly and blatantly, and the unanswered question 
     in all this is, whether or not the matter was referred 
     to Peking and whether or not Peking objected. For my own 
     part, I would not be surprised if that did take place. I 
     wonder how many Australians now realise that there is not 
     a country in the world that would regard our foreign policy 
     as being aligned with Britain and the U.S.A., traditional
•    friends and helpers. They would regard us as being aligned 
     with the third world, with the non-aligned countries, or 
     with China. I doubt if that is what the majority of 
     Australians want.















•

