<!--start metadata-->
Title: Beef cattle industry, wheat industry
Description: Radio broadcast
Date: 28/05/1972
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


    BROADCAST        3HA Sunday, 28th May, 1972 
                     3YB Thursday, 1st June, 1972 
                     3LK Tuesday, 30th May, 1972



      A week or two ago, the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr. 
    Sinclair, issued what amounted to a progress report on a survey of 
    the Australian beef cattle industry by the Bureau of Agricultural 
    Economics. Field work on the survey has been completed in all 
•
    southern States except Victoria, and is about to commence in 
    northern Australia. The field work in Victoria is planned for 
    later this year.
      The new survey covering the last four financial years will 
    provide the industry and the Government with valuable information 

    on the levels of producers' incomes, the degree of dependence of 
    these incomes on beef cattle production, and on movements in 
    production costs, productivity and other related factors. The 

•   survey is financially supported by the Australian Meat Research 
    Committee and has been endorsed by the Australian Agricultural 
    Council.
      There's no doubt that rural producers ale turning increasingly 
    to beef cattle production as a means of improving their incomes. 
    The Bureau of Agricultural Economics has recently published a report 

    entitled "Beef Cattle on Australian Sheep Properties" which has a 
    real bearing on Western Victoria.. It shows that a significant and 
    growing proportion of the total beef cattle industry is represented by 

    beef production on sheep properties.
      Over the years 1967-68 to 1969-70, Australian beef cattle numbers 
    rose from 14.7 million to 17.9 million, a 22 per cent rise.

                            /2

       2.



       Over the same period, the number of beef cattle run on sheep 

       properties rose from an estimated 5.2 million to 7.7 million, a
       rise of 47 per cent. By comparison, sheep numbers rose from 167
                                ~li.lG c 74-07               dz..," 
       million to 180 million, a rise of only 8 per cent' By 19 9, beef

       cattle numbers on sheep properties accounted for about 40 per cent 

       of total beef cattle numbers in Australia, and subsequent estimates 
       made by the Bureau indicate that for 1971-72, this figure has 

       increased to about 45 per cent.
           The survey will be valuable in that it will accurately document 

       the economic and financial situation of producers in the beef cattle 
       industry. It is information like this that is essential for any 
       future planning of the industry.







•          Moving from beef cattle to another rural industry, I would 

       like now to touch on work the C.S.I.R.O. is doing to tackle a

       major problem it has the storage of wheat.






                                                     /3

                                  - 3

       Wheat is a big and competitive business, and grain export 
       regulations, stimulated by exacting customers, ensure today 
       that export consignments do not have unacceptable levels of 
       insects or pesticide residues.

       These changes, and the world-wide appearance of insect strains 
       resistant to the chemicals commonly used to protect stored
•      grain, make a review of current research work in the C.S.I.R.O. 
       divisions of entomology and mechanical engineering timely.

       Resistance to the chemicals used to protect grain in storage 
       is causing concern here and in other parts of the world, and 
       it is this problem of resistance that is currently being 
       investigated at the C.S.I.R.O. Long Pocket laboratories in 
       Brisbane.

•      The division is seeking non-chemical means of protecting stored 
       grain and, if it is successful, it should also overcome the 
       problem of toxic residues in treated grain.

       The efficiency of air-tight storage has been considered, but 
       it seems that, to achieve satisfactory control of weevils by
       sealing the grain bins, the cost was too great. The division 
       has also tried to flush air from a storage using inert gases. 
       In another effort to find a non-chemical method of insect 
       control, division officiers have examined the practice of 
       "turning" the grain for research has shown that mechanical 
       disturbance hinders, or even stops, tre insects' development.

                                   4
       And so the C.S.I.R.O. works towards the practical solution
       to the problems of wheat storage. The importance of their 
       work to the nation cannot be overestimated because it is 
       becoming increasingly apparent that on the international wheat 
       markets of the future there will be a premium placed on quality 
       grain.
•
       In the few remaining minutes,  will touch briefly on education
       which is, of course, my specif c area of responsibility in the 
       Federal Government.

       This week, the House of Repres-1 atives is debating, among other 
       things, the State Grants (Cap't:l Assistance) Bill, the enabling 
       legislation implementing the undertaking of the Prime Minister 
       last December to provide the S ates with an. additional $20
•      million specifically for Gover gent primary and secondary school
       construction.  This is being ailed in the States as a most
       significant break-through as i is the first time a grant 
       for this particular purpose h-s been made.

       Then last month, at the Premi=•rs Conference, the Commonwealth
       granted the States further additional funds. At the time the 
       Prime Minister made it clear that the increased loan funds would 
       permit the carrying out of additional worthwhile public works
       projects such as schools,   he Tasmanian Government has 
       disclosed it will spend 37 p cent of its additional works and 
       housing allocation on education, Victoria about 30 per cent,
       and New South Wales nearly 20 per cent. The Queensland figures 
       are not available.

