<!--start metadata-->
Title: Television
Description: press statement
Date: 11/11/1960
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


PRESS STATEMENT:                                           November 1th,1960
MALCOLM FRASER:

                                 TELEVISION
              Yesterday the Postmaster-General announced the successful applicants 
for thirteen country T.V. stations. The successful applicant for the country
area was the independent company with headquarters at Ballarat. Although I 

had previously, in the House, queried whether the independent concern would give 
as good a service to viewers as an extension of GTV. 9, I am glad the Government 
has confidence in the capacity of the independent company to supply a good 
service to country viewers.
              Legislation that the Government has previously passed will ensure 
that good programs are available to these independent companies and supervision 
by the Control Board will ensure the quality of the particular programs.
              In the Parliament I had queried three aspects of the independent
company's application.     One aspect was its desire for a commercial monopoly. 
As regards this, the Government has said quite categorically that the fact that 
any one company has been given a commercial licence in a particular area does 
not mean that that company will be the only one to receive a licence. As 
television develops, and if the advertising in the area shows that a second 
commercial station can be supported, the Government will consider granting a 
second commercial licence in that particular area.
              I also queried the siting chosen by the independent company, 
which was Mt.Buninyong. I opposed this siting because a television station 
situated at Mt. Buninyong would only serve to duplicate many of the services 
available from Melbourne stations. I considered that the siting on Mt.Buangor, 
45 miles west of Ballarat, would be much preferable because it would bring in an 
additional 60,000 to 80,000 people in a first-class T.V. reception area.
              Paragraph 1L9 of the Broadcasting Control Board's Report shows 
that the Board clearly prefers Mt. Buangor as a site and I very much hope that 
the Cabinet Sub-Committee that has been established to examine siting will 
take heed of the Board's opinion in this regard.
              The independent Company has shown that it will establish the 
station where it is directed by the Government even though it would prefer tc 
establish a station at Mt. Buninyong.
              I have fairly strong grounds for believing that the statu 
will be situated at Mt. Buangor which will be of much greater benefit
people of Western Victoria.

                     2 VMS

            had, thirdly, queried the inlependent company's application 
on the grounds of the number of hours that it was prepared to offer. These were 
nothing like so great as the number of hours athat GTV.9. was prepared to offer. 
However, so far as this is concerned, corns consolation can be taken from the 
fact that as the independent stations are established so, too, will the Government 
be establishing its national network to serve country viewers. The national 
stations will be situated in the same position as the commercial stations.
This will, therefore, give country viewers a second alternative T.V. service.
           The Government has not come to a firm decision yet as to 
when national stations will be established but I would be surprised if they are 
not in operation very nearly as quickly as the commercial stations.

