<!--start metadata-->
Title: St Mary's defence project
Description: radio talk
Date: 27/10/1957
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


FIVE MINUTE TALK BST MALCOLM ERASER . M.H. R. FOR 7ANNON — 27210/57:
   In the last few weeks, the Government's major defence
project at St. Marys has been vividly brought under public notice.
   A new impetus was given to the critics of the St. Marys
filling factory when Major—General Legge brought forward 
charges. The first was that the new St. Marys eras an extravagance
and that it was unnecessary for effective defence. The second was
that its construction was contrary to the advice and recommendations
of the Chiefs of Staff.
   Very briefly, I want to give the full story of St. Marys
because I believe that from the facts as they have been brought
forward the project has been soundly undertaken and is most certainly
in the national interest.
   Early in its torm of office the Government decided to
examine the defence needs of the country. Amongst these things
was the requirement to have filling capacity available inside
Australia, that is, the capacity to fill bombs, shells, bullets
and torpedo heads with explosives without which these things would
be useless in times of emergency. It came to the conclusion that
a filling capacity five times that of the old St. Marys factory
would be required. The question then was how was this need to be
best fulfilled in the national interest.
   Shortly after the war, the filling factory at Salisbury
had been made available to the long range weapons establishment
and it could not be re—occupied. Th3 old St. Marys had been
made available to private industry. Over 90 firms had become
tenants of the Commonwealth at a time when the Labour Party was
in Government and 3,000 people were employed by these firms and
clearly if they were going to be turned out there would be con-
siderable social and economic disturbance.
   Furthermore, the old St. Marys factory had a very small
capacity when taken in the light of modern needs of the Armed
Services. For economic reasons as well as for reasons of defence

               -2— 

therefore the Government decided to build a new filling factory 
at St. Marys. The cost was estimated.in the beginning to be just 
over £23M. The Chiefs of Staff had pointed out the urgency of the 
proposal. One of their recommendations, it is true, did reluctantly 
come to the conclusion that unless a new filling factory could be 
built by the end of 1957, the old St. Marys plant should be re—occupied 
for filling purposes. For reasons that I have already stated, the 
Government decided not to re—occupy the old St. Marys but to build 
a new one and they decided to have it completed by the end of 1957. 
It will be completed in that time.
    One of Major—General Legme's charges was that St. Marys was 
an extravagance and that it was unnecessary for effective defence, 
a charge which seemed to imply that it would have been better to 
refurbish the old St. Marys. This is not a military judgment but a 
social one which the Government must take on its own. Because of 
the social implications involved to the tenants of the old St. Marys 
and to the people employed in the factories, the decision was made 
to build a new factory and not refurbish the old ono.
    Concerning the question of extravagance, it is true that the 
cost is going to be £3MI. more than was originally estimated. There 
are three specific reasons for this increased cost. Firstly, there 
were considerable floods during last year which had been estimated 
to cost an increase of over £lM. because of the delays and diffi- 
culties that they incurred. Secondly, there was a New South Wales 
special site award made by Mr. Justice Taylor, an award which was 
specifically for the people employed on the St. Marys project and 
which raised the cost of the wages and salaries bill again by L 1M. 
or more. Thirdly, the electrification of the railway by the N.S.W. 
Government to St. Marys involved an increased expenditure by the 
Commonwealth Government of a further £lM. These three things are 
outside the control of the Commonwealth.

•                                         -3-
                Major-Goneral Lagge's second charge was that the con- 
      struction of St. Marys was contrary to the advice and recommendations 
      of the Chiefs of Staff.
                The Prime Minister in the House quoted a letter from the 
      Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, Admiral Sir Rom Dowling,vu 14.
         paragraph of which says This: "The Chief of Staff moo strongly 
      deplore the action taken by Major-General Legge, retired. His 
      public statements regarding St. I,Marys are both unethical and 
      inaccurate. I reiterate my statement that the Chiefs of Staff 
      unanimously supported the decision to build a new filling factory 
      at St. Marys." Other documents were also given by the Prime
      Minister in further evidence of this.
                There is one further point I want to make. The ?rime 
      Minister quoted in the Parliament a Minute for Minister which was 
      signed by Major-General Legge as Major-General of the Ordnance. 
      That Minute quite clearly approved the location of St. Marys and 
      the proposal to build the new factory saying that even with the 
      project it would be some time before the filling capacity in 
      Australia comes within reacà of the needs of the Defence Forces.
                In his criticism it is difficult to see how Major-General 
      Legge could have forgotten that he had signed this Minute approving 
      of the St. Marys project at a time, incidentally, when its original 
      cost was already known.
                If anyone is .particularly interested in the most important
      debate that took place on St. Marys I would willingly send them
      copies of Hansard, but         want to say finally, the project has been 
      essential for Australia's defence. It was essential that it be 
      completed by the and of this year andhat the 'charges brought 
      against the Government on this issue have no real substance when 
      the whole case is examined.

THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH.

              HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 
                 CANBERRA, A.C.T., 4S.
               23rd October, 1957.


 Forwarded with the Compliments of


     MALCOLM FRASER M.P.

