<!--start metadata-->
Title: Parliamentary matters, farmers' rally at Warrnambool
Description: electoral talk
Date: 27/04/1975
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2005.0072
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115222&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.                      27.4.75

Electoral Talk

Looking back over the last 3 weeks of parliament I believe it's 
fair to say that the institution has become more serious, more 
hardworking and a place of greater and proper dignity.

It would not be fair if I were not to give credit to the new 
Speaker Mr. Gordon Scholes who has set a standard for impartiality
which is a personal tribute to him. He has not feared to use his 
tongue on the Prime Minister or to sit down a government Minister 
for wasting the time of the house.

But we would also be doing the Opposition less than justice if
we did not accept some share of credit. So far there has been no 
repitition of the rowdy scenes which have marked the conduct of 
the national parliament and for which all parties have to shoulder 
blame.

Interjections are far fewer in number and have become all the more 
effective because of this.

Question Time is going better for all parties in the House.

A while ago constant interruptions and general exploitation of 
the rules of parliament had reduced the number of questions for 
which there was time during the 45 minutes given to questions to 
about 8.

This last week as many as 16 or 17 questions have been asked in 
the same period which it means twice the opportunity for the 
government supporters to provide Ministers with opportunities to 
air their latest proposals, but it also provides the Opposition 
with twice the opportunity to keep up the pressure on the
government.   That is the Opposition's constitutional role.

It also provides backbenchers on both sides of the parliament with 
a better opportuning to raise those matters which are important 
to their constituents.

One of the things the Opposition has tried to do is to restore to 
parliament its proper function as a place where important 
decisions are announced and where policy is declared.

The Prime Minister has made a rare statement on foreign affairs 
to the House while the Minister for Defence made an equally 
unusual report on his responsibilities.

I took the opportunity earlier this month to put before the 
parliament proposals for reform which I believe could make the 
work of parliament faster and more effective.

I suggested that the whole of the House should divide into two 
general purpose committies to ç1eal with minor legislation, and 
although, the Leader of government business gagged debate on my 
motion after I had spoken, I believe the reforms I have advocated 
must come eventually, in the interests of better parliament.

Farmers' Rally at Warrnambool

The Minister for Agriculture, Sen. Wriedt and I both missed the 
rally which we were to have attended at Warrnambool a week ago, but 
for very different reasons.

                2






Sen. Wriedt stayed in Canberra to discuss the affairs of the 
Labor Party at a meeting of its Federal Executive.

I flew off from Canberra to Victoria but was prevented from 
landing first at Warrnambool and then at Hamilton because of fog. 
I issued a challenge to Sen. Wriedt to debate rural policies with 
me at a different place, after he said that the people of 
Warrnambool were an "unintelligent audience" and that he would not 
go to Warrnambool.

I have denounced Sen. Wriedt for this offensive remark but I 
shall certainly take the first opportunity to put before a farming 
audience, from the same platform, as Sen. Wriedt, the rural 
policies which we believe are the right ones for Australia.

Just for the record, this is what Senator Wriedt said to me when 
he wrote a few days ago.

Senator Wriedt said: "I do not intend to go back to Warrnambool 
in the near future as I am sick and tired of being deliverately 
maligned and my position distorted by bigoted elements in that 
area".

The people of Western Victoria will know how to judge that 
remark.

