<!--start metadata-->
Title: Myxomatosis
Description: radio talk, first campaign given over 3HA for the May 1954 election
Date: 18/04/1954
Collection: John Malcolm Fraser, 2007.0023
Collection URI: http://gallery.its.unimelb.edu.au/imu/imu.php?request=load&irn=115190&ecatalogue=on&view=details
Format: Uncorrected OCR text
<!--end metadata-->


~                                   ra

                              MXZG~..-.~AT0â1â.





          Three hundred years ago,the Spaniards conquered âouth America. The European 

  rabbit, which is the same as ours, crossed the Atlantic with them,Unlike the case 

  in Australia, the rabbit has never become a real Jam pest in S.America, but the 

  reason for this did not appear for some time, for much of their country is like

  ours and we would have expected the European rabbit to breed thereb as it does in 
  Australia,

          In SouthAmerica there i~~, also another species of rabbit which is native to
  that country, ands6,4+44, a   A 1     breed€ quickly. This rabbit has had Lyx, for 
  centurieseellremeddoes not kill this native rabbit which suffers from the diseace 
  much as we suffer from a cold. Every now and again Myx. spreads to the European 

  rabbit and kills great numbers of them( as it has recently done in Australia )s an 
  prevents them from reaching plague proportions,

         In 1919 Professor 'aeon first wrote to suggest that Eyx. be tried in Asst, 
  and eight years later he sent a sample of Iyx, virus to Australia. The authorities 

  carried out a few- experiments which wereprorising but thence no further work was 

 done. In 1933 Dr,e =--'acnama~ a who was studying poliomylitis in America, , came

  across ?yx, for the first time and sent a further sample to Australia that was 
 destroyed.

         From 1933-36 Dr. J.LI, managed to get Manley Bruce to have experiments con- 

 ducted in England which were continued in Australia until 1944. In this experimental 

  stage it was proved that no other animals can suffer from Myx.

         After further struggles Dr. J.M. got experiments going again in 1950. At first 
 field tests were not particularly successful. Some rabbits were inoculated at

 Gunbowe i on thee-urraYand for a while Myx. lay dormant, and then from infected rabbits

 in this area it spread over much of .astern Australia in 1950. :;. rx. had caught on 
 at last.

          In this last year many people have tried to infect rabbits in their area

 with myx. with discouraging results. It is an unhappy fact that in many instances

  dude virus was issued to the people. The authorities are now aware of this and are tm

 taking much more care in sealing capsules to see that no air that could spoil the

 virus can get in. Efforts arec also being made to get the virus used soon after it

 is issued. It can keep for a long time in a cold place but if it got warm through

  the post ticAè boxes of cars it could easily lose its strength, More care with the
 capsules is the first thing that will lead to better results.

           The effectiveness of 1,yx. depends largely upon the mosquitoes, sand flies

 and fleas that spread the disease from rabbit to rabbit. In this counteyn,e know

 very little about our insect life.Here we have no yellow fever and no malaria which

 are carried amongst people in the same way that ï.yx. is carried amongst veep& rabbits

 and hence until the coming of myx. we have had no real cause to learn about our

 insect life. These insects do not work all the year around and unless they are

 working h.yx. will not spread, So you can easily see that inoculation carried out at

 the wrong time of the year will have no results. It is not enough to go outside on

 a-summer night, be bitten by a mosquito, and say "Ah, a good month for yx."s for

mosquitoes that bite poeple do not always bite rabbits, and some mosquitoes that

bite rabbits donot worry uswhen we sit outside in thecsummer. At the moment there

 is one man in Gippsland watching insect life, but it will take a long time for one

person to get around Victoria, Each area should have men who could learn about
their particular area and advise the best months in which to inoculate,

           With more care and knowledge of our insect life there is no reason why
myx, should not serve us for many years to come for there is no evidence to show that 
 immunity can be bred up.

           It may seem strange that a Dr. of Medicine, Dr. J.L., has gilen so much 

of her time to rabbit destruction, but her reason has been sound and one which should 

move us alle The health of our children and the food we are able to give them depends 
very much upon the soil nature has given this country. Rabbit plagues have often led 

to erosion and made land unfit for Bing. Such wastage of resources cannot be
allowed to continue if we are all t   r part in keeping Australia
children may always be happy and well fed that the may           prosesrans' that
count                                   ~         y aJ love their homes and. 
     rsy.We must remember that preservation of our natural resources is pur first 
duty to generations yet unborn.

